how long to rest between sets?

when it comes to calculating the length of your rest timer between sets, it’s important first to consider how demanding each interval is. are you doing situps or lifting some challenging weights? squats or sprints? your rest time will depend on how hard you are pushing yourself.
shorter rest periods are suited to intervals that aren’t too demanding. it ups the intensity of your workout because your recovery is incomplete, so your heart rate will remain high. longer rest periods are suited to demanding intervals in terms of effort or length. full recovery is essential so you can give each round your all. 

it’s also essential to work out what your training goals are, as different rest periods will emphasize particular results:
1. training for muscular endurance: involves a high volume of reps with lighter weights, focusing on a key area (such as arms if you’re a swimmer). for this goal, a shorter rest period of 20-60 seconds between sets is suitable.
2. training for muscle growth: bodybuilding or muscular hypertrophy involves a high volume of reps with less rest time with lighter weights to metabolically stress the muscle and increase its size. for this goal, a moderate rest period of 30-90 seconds between sets is suitable. 
3. training for power: involves a low volume of reps with light to moderately heavy weights, focussing on the speed of execution. for this goal, a longer rest period of 2-5 minutes between sets is suitable. 
4. training for strength: involves a low volume of reps with heavier weights to increase your ability to lift heavier loads. for this goal, a longer rest period of 2-5 minutes between sets is suitable. 

it’s important to note that when you’re new to strength training, it’s recommended that you take a little extra time to rest while also making sure that your heart rate and body temperature don’t return to their regular levels. pushing yourself could result in you feeling nauseous at first, while taking additional rest will help you maintain the belief that you have the capacity to keep going – which is important when you’re starting out. so, listen to your body.

conclusion: rest time between sets

one of the key elements of interval training is understanding how your body responds to your workouts. knowing which muscle energy system you’re using for a particular exercise means you’ll know how long you can go before needing to rest.
in turn, identifying your training goals will help you calculate your rest time to take between these sets to ensure you get the most out of each rep. plus, with our new feature work-rest guide you’ll be able to understand how much rest you need in real-time as you work out.
remember, rest is an essential part of interval workouts, for both efficiency and minimizing the risk of injury. so, give yourself a break. you deserve it.