sidebarr
the shoulder complex is a series of four joints, largely held together
by the shoulder blade (aka [also known as] the scapula). this single
bone has  muscle attachments! these muscles span all the way from
your forearm to your lower back. this incredible level of integration
helps to show that theres no such thing as isolation trainingif youre
focusing on one muscle, youre affecting many others in some way.
in order to help stabilize the shoulder and offset the huge volume of
overhead and especially frontal pressing that everyone does, well draw
heavily from the insights explored through the pain free performance
specialist certifi cation (ppsc). after nearly  years of lifting, lessons
from the ppsc have had the biggest overall impact on my training, and
they rank number  on my list of things i wish i had known sooner.
the fi rst of these comes from ppsc founder dr. john rusin and is aptly
named the rusin three-way banded shoulder saver. its simple, but it
is also a life-altering component of preworkout activation.
bbaannddeedd oovveerr aanndd bbaacckk
setup
 grab a light band with an overhand grip and your elbows extended.
 the elbows will naturally flex as needed throughout this shoulder and
upper back-focused movement.
execution
 raise your hands back and over your head while moving the arms into
external rotation (a).
 once overhead, drop your hands down behind you as you retract your
shoulder blades (i.e., pull them together) (b).
 reverse the direction to return to the starting position.
coaching tip
use a light band and focus on the quality of the movement.
a b
bbaannddeedd ffaaccee ppuullll
setup
 anchor the band at chin height.
 grab the other end of the band with the fingers of both of your hands.
 facing the anchor, step back to establish tension with your arms straight
out in front of you. your forearms should be roughly parallel with each
other and the ground (a).
execution
 drive your elbows back and externally rotate the humerus so that your
forearms approach vertical to the ground (b).
 end the concentric portion when your hands are beside your face,
between your forehead and chin..
 reverse the movement for the eccentric portion.
coaching tip
keep a light but secure grip on the band to ensure that your arms do not
become excessively involved.
a b
bbaannddeedd ppuullll--aappaarrtt
setup
 put your head through the center of a band so it hangs like a chain
around your neck.
 grab the far end with both hands using an overhand grip, so that your
forearms are roughly parallel to each other.
 extend your elbows and bring your arms up to shoulder height in front
of you (a).
 make sure your palms are facing the ground.
execution
 abduct your arms to pull the band apart, by squeezing your back mus-
culature.
 as youre abducting, rotate the wrists so that your thumbs are pointing
up by the end of the concentric portion (b).
 reverse the movements for the eccentric portion.
coaching tip
its surprisingly common to lose core tension when performing this standing
exercise. be aware of this and maintain stabilizing tension throughout.
 massive, muscular arms whole-body integration 
a
b
core preparation exercises
in spite of my haunting hours with cadavers in the anatomy lab, it never fails
to amaze me how integrated our entire muscular system is. one of the best
examples is your core, which is involved in nearly every movement you do.
this is essential to not only understand but also to come to appreciate when
youre targeting arm training.
ive known a few otherwise healthy people who have injured their lower
backs by heaving up that last rep during a set of barbell biceps curls. if
youre thinking, thats stupid; it would never happen to me, know that each
individual thought the exact same thing, right up until it happened.
one common reason for this type of injury (and many others) is a general
lack of core strength. we can be confident about this sweeping claim by
identifying that the core musculature ranges from front to back and side to
side, from nipples to knees. using this broad definition helps to reinforce
the idea that our muscles and their connections are a complex, integrated
network. as we come to truly appreciate this concept, well be able to take
full advantage for optimal muscular development.
developing core strength will help you to perform heavier arm exercises,
and pretty much everything else you do in life.
as part of preworkout activation, youll come to dominate two powerful
exercises: modified bird dogs and dead bugs.
tips
 these movements are most helpful when you continually try to improve
your form, each rep. start the exercise by moving one limb at a time
and try to improve the technique with each. when you develop single
limb movement mastery, you can perform with two limbs. although it is
common for people to jump the gun and start with the two-limb version,
it is important to earn this progression. in doing so, your execution of
the movement with simultaneous opposite limbs will be much higher
quality and subsequently far more effective, which will feel like a major
accomplishment.
 if youre new to these exercises, keep in mind that quality is king. it doesnt
matter if youre performing only three reps at a time, as long as youre
getting better with each rep. you can personalize your execution of
these movements by using the key performance indicator of movement
quality, rather than a predetermined number of reps. once movement
quality fails to improve on two consecutive reps, its likely that fatigue
has set in, and its time to call an end to the set.
bbiirrdd ddoogg ((mmooddiiffiieedd))
setup
 start on your hands and knees (aka quadruped position).
 screw your hands into the ground by firmly planting them and then trying
to rotate them outward. a similar technique is used for many lower body
exercises and is described in put the screw on (see page ).
 establish stabilizing tension in your hips and core.
executionarm
 bring one arm up to  degrees at the shoulder and elbow.
 make a fist with your palm facing the midline of your body (i.e., the
neutral position) (a).
 punch forward by flexing the shoulder and extending the elbow. simul-
taneously rotate the wrist so that the palm of the fist is facing the ground
(i.e., pronate it).
 in the end position, make sure your biceps muscle is beside your ear.
 reverse the direction for the eccentric portion.
executionleg
 extend your hip and try to maintain a horizontal shin angle throughout.
 very lightly drag your big toe along the ground as you drive back and
raise it only an inch to complete the concentric portion of the exercise (b).
 reverse the movement for the eccentric portion.
coaching tips
 this is not an arm or leg exercise; it is a stability-and-control-while-
moving exercise.
 only move the limb youre intentionally trying to move. everything else
should be rock solid.
 the amount of tension you want to generate can be shown with the follow-
ing cue: you should be trying to grip the ground so hard that if someone
were to turn it upside down, youd be able to cling to it.
 for simultaneous limb work, try to create the greatest distance between
your hand and your big toe. that will prevent you from creating the
excessive lower back curve that you see on instagram. this is the time
for movement quality, not for gaining followers!
 massive, muscular arms whole-body integration 
a
b
ddeeaadd bbuugg
setup
 lie on your back with your thighs and arms vertical
 bend your knees at  degrees and extend your elbows (a).
executionarm
 extend one shoulder so that it ends near the top of your head as your
hand touches the ground.
 reverse the direction for the concentric portion.
executionleg
 extend at one hip while keeping your shin parallel to the ground so that
your knee naturally extends (b).
 when your heel taps the ground, reverse the direction for the concentric
portion.
coaching tips
 this is not an arm or leg exercise; it is a stability-and-control-while-
moving exercise.
 only move the limb youre intentionally trying to move. everything else
should be rock solid.
 your torso is fully supported by the ground, which makes this the perfect
time to focus on bracing and breathing while moving your limbs.
 massive, muscular arms whole-body integration 
a
b
key : targeted focus
the concept of bullet proofing dovetails nicely with the fifth and final key
target (the first four keys were discussed in chapters  and ). it begins
by activating your most neglected training tool: your brain. rather than
mindlessly moving iron (which we usually do), you can use your attentional
focus to significantly upgrade your training stimulus. once you experience
this and the subsequent results, youll never go back to traditional meathead
(i.e., all muscle, no brain) workouts.
this key target is so big it comes in two phases. phase i is all about creating
internal tension to stabilize your body and allow it to perform optimally. phase
ii challenges your instincts to get the most out of each muscle contraction.
as a reminder of each of the five key targets, which were discussed in this
chapter and chapters  and , they have been compiled and are summarized
here:
 anatomically targeted training. understanding your physical anatomy
and that of resistance training, so you can then optimize
 targeted training parameters. the various ways through which the
training stimulus can be manipulated
 adaptive targeting. stress stimulus, stress response, recovery, and
adaptation (aka four-phase gains)
 precision microtargeting. training to stimulate both metabolic growth
and structural growth for maximal muscle development
 targeted focus. whole-body stability (phase i) and internal locus of
focus (phase ii)
focus phase i: stabilizing tension
this phase is all about creating stability for your entire body, which might
help to mitigate injury risk, but can also make your lifts better. the central
idea is that your body has internal sensors that detect how stable you are in
a particular position, which then affects your strength. for example, imagine
standing on an unstable surface like a pair of inflatable discs. how much force
could you put into an overhead barbell press in this state? now swap the discs
for a solid rubber floor and imagine the same scenario. you can almost feel
the greater strength and stability with the latter.
this change in your ability to produce force is internally regulated by your
nervous system. its a protective mechanism to ensure that youre not exerting
too much force in an unstable and potentially injurious position. why would
your body subject itself to risky movements if youre about as safe as bambi
on ice? the body likes to feel stablethats when it allows you to perform
maximally. we can use this knowledge to enhance performance with each
and every set. if we increase this level of stability on every lift, well be able to
generate greater force and have better overall performance, which translates
into muscular development. remember: be stable, be strong.
put the screw on
one way to create stabilizing tension throughout your body is by screwing
your feet into the ground when standing. this happens by trying to turn your
feet out (externally rotating, creating torque) while they are firmly planted.
squeeze your gluteus and inner thigh muscles (i.e., your adductors) for maximal
effect. this base of support establishes the foundation for maximal strength.
apply this technique to lower body exercises by thinking of the eccentric
portion of the movement as a controlled pulling down (during a squat, for
example), as opposed to passively dropping down. it may feel a bit unusual
at first, but youll soon come to love the stability, the control, and the gains.
brace yourself
the next step is probably going to change your life. its called bracing and
was popularized by one of my earliest mentors in strength and conditioning,
dr. stu mcgill, who also happens to be a worlds expert in lower back and
core function.
traditional bracing has been described as taking a deep breath and holding
it, in an attempt to establish tension throughout your core. an updated, and
more accurate description is to take a breath in and pretend that youre about
the be punched in the stomach. you can do this right now and feel it. that
resulting tension can be applied during a lift to help to stabilize your core
and ultimately the rest of your body.
the amount of bracing tension can be regulated based on how much
stability you need during a given exercise. if youre performing a maximal-
effort back squat, you want to hold near-maximal tension. contrast this with
a set of seated calf raises, for which you can let out more breath to scale down
the tension. note that youre not holding your breath the entire time. you
might briefly hold it during the heaviest portion of the concentric phase, but
the goal is to maintain a braced core while breathing as needed.
tip
if youre a chest breather (i.e., your chest inflates rather than your abdomen),
you will have an additional challenge of learning to use your diaphragm
to draw breath (aka belly breathing). thats because bracing pulls your rib
cage down for stability, so the diaphragm is forced (or allowed) to do all the
work of breathing. its beyond the scope of this book to go into significant
detail, but your entire body will benefit from learning to breathe through
your diaphragm. youll find a strategy to take advantage of this powerful
physiology in chapter , recovery optimization.
shoulder stability
the final part of stabilizing tension, which is especially important for
arm training, is stabilizing the shoulder by isometrically contracting your
pectoralis and latissimus dorsi muscles during the set. when youre doing
isolation work, the new level of stability provided through this squeeze will
immediately be a game changer for your arms. the first couple of times you
try this it may seem impossible to imagine a scenario when this will become
automatic. in my experience with clients and athletes, this is one of the fastest
adaptations our mind and body pick up. theres something very telling about
that. stated simply: it might feel unnatural at first, but our body really likes
it and is quick to adopt it.
summary of phase i focusinternal stability
 screwing into the ground
 bracing
 shoulders (pectoralis and latissimus dorsi muscles)
its important to remember that youre doing this to provide immediate
performance enhancement, as well as training longevity. it may take you a
few weeks to really feel comfortable with stabilizing tension, but performing
this with every set gives you a ton of practice and the results come fast. its
so effective that you shouldnt be surprised to find yourself bracing during
everyday activities (e.g., picking up bags, dogs, cars, etc.). in fact, achieving
this level of automatic activation allows you to progress to focus phase ii. this
quote from dr. john rusin concisely explains the need for developing internal
tension: your goal is to make light weight feel heavy, so you can make heavy
weight feel light. (john rusin, pers. comm.). stated differently, if you make
the effort to develop stability today, youll be much stronger tomorrow.
focus phase ii: mindmuscle connection
the scientific term for phase ii focus is locus of focus and refers to where
you place your attention during each rep. think about your most recent lift
and try to recall. was your attention focused on squeezing the muscle, which
ultimately moves the load, or were you laser locked on moving the resistance
itself (e.g., a dumbbell)? the universal answer is the latter, which provides
another exciting opportunity for arm growth.
we have limited capacity for attention, so its important that you first
master focus phase i before progressing. once youre able to create tension
and stability throughout your body almost automatically, youre ready to
take full advantage of this next level of focus. research has shown that for
maximal hypertrophy, you should put your attention into squeezing the
muscle to move the load throughout the entire rep (schoenfeld et al. ).
it might sound obvious, but its actually counterintuitive. our instinct is to
make things easier by focusing on moving the load. how many times have
you found yourself fighting to just get the bar up on your last rep? sure, it
may feel hard at that point, but what about every other rep until then? did
those preceding reps contribute to growth stimulation, or were they simply
filler so you could stimulate at the end of the set?
intentionally contracting the muscle is known as an internal locus of
focus, because youre focused on your active muscles rather than an external
implement. its great for hypertrophy because it makes our muscle contraction
less efficient, which is exactly what we want. this inefficiency creates greater
metabolic waste during the set, which is a stress stimulus we explored in
chapter . this translates into faster fatigue during the set, so you may
have to drop the weight a little at first. uh-oh. using a lighter load sounds
horrible, doesnt it? but recall from the key of precision microtargeting that
your training objective is to induce optimal stress stimulus on the muscle. in
this case, the powerfully focused stress stimulus targets metabolic growth.
so, if youre training for muscle development, ignore the devil of your
short-term ego and stick to what youll soon see working. if youre still wary,
remind your ego that a recent analysis of hypertrophy research showed that
high- and low-load resistance are equally effective for gains (schoenfeld et
al. )and thats even without the focus-based boost that youll soon be
using.
dont worry; your strength will come. for strength training phases, youll
employ an external locus of focus, which is all about moving the load itself.
note that this is what most people do most of the time, if theyre even focused
on the training at hand (which theyre often not).
stop warming up
one of the best kept training secrets lies in executing a dramatic paradigm
shift for what is traditionally thought of as a warm-up. the reality is that when
done right, its probably the best performance booster we have at our disposal.
somewhere along the way our warm-up became little more than an
obligation. it morphed into that thing we do because someone told us it
might help prevent injuries. this is a wasted opportunity, every workout.
no more.
in order to take full advantage, you will come to think of the warm-up
as the preparation phase, or activation phase of your workout. rather than
simply getting your body warm and preventing something that will probably
never happen to you anyway (i.e., injuries), your focused activation phase
will help you perform better, both mentally and physically. this is the time
to get your head in the game, not chat about instagram posts or how much
alcohol you drank last night.
you will still want to perform traditional physical preparation, like
brief cardiovascular exercise to help get your blood moving, and dynamic
stretching, etc. but after that, youre going to treat your activation as though
youre getting ready for a fight. no more lazy stretching while you lie around
talking about your weekend. this idea was best summed up by ppsc chief
content officer david otey, if you want to perform optimally, you need to
prepare optimally. (david otey, pers. comm.).
you will execute your bullet proofing movements with intent and focus
on quality. you will practice the exercises that you are going to perform on
that day, before you have anything more than body-weight resistance. these
activation exercises are not meant to replace exercise-specific warm-up sets
of increasing load (e.g., a set of curls with  pounds [. kg], then another
with  pounds [. kg], before moving on to your work set), but the body-
weight movement will come to enhance those loaded sets.
performing without load allows you to focus on creating internal tension
(focus phase i) and prepares you to execute the loaded movement with
maximal force or speed, without the nagging fear of injury. this is where
youll develop even more confidence to perform that day. you will establish the
mindmuscle connection that gives you the mental and physical confidence to
crush each lift. if performed with intent and focus, you will feel the difference,
immediately.
your warm-up is dead. long live activation!
example of a squat-focused preworkout activation plan
 five minutes on the treadmill
 three-way rusin shoulder saver
 modified bird dogs
 dead bugs
 focused body-weight squats
 jumping jacks
strategic whole-body training:
movements and exercises
we need to establish some ground rules about optimal lifting. for example, if
the central tenet of this book is to optimize your arm musculature, then any
indirect training components must at least not interfere with this. thats only
fair, right? but if were more strategic about the process, a more advanced
goal would be to choose exercises that actually enhance both short- and
long-term arm development. were getting warmer.
the best-case scenario would be if this training also enhanced long-
term strength, as well as arm and overall physique development, while also
mitigating risk of injury. if youre still reading, its likely because youve
guessed that were going with the final option: ultimate arm training.
body partspecific exercises
as a final note regarding your personalized physique training, its possible
that you may want to add more traditional body partspecific exercises, like
calf raises or shrugs. before you throw them in blindly, its important to first
see how your body responds to the program without them. considering that
many of these strategic exercises may be new, and youre developing your
ability to brace and focus on contracting muscles, you may be surprised by
their whole-body impact.
this was best exemplified by a client who was desperate to grow his calves,
while integrating this whole-body program. in spite of the warnings, he threw
heavy calf raises into the program along with a variety of novel lower body
work. the result? his calves were so sore that limping to the toilet became the
extent of his physical ability for the next three days. for this reason, well focus
on arm exercises, as well as strategically chosen movement-based exercises
that will facilitate arm development, discussed in the following sections.
six foundational movements
the exercise selection is strategically developed to boost your arm-centric
program, while still hitting the six foundational human movement
patterns: squat, hinge, lunge, push, pull, and carry. to better appreciate
their importance, well identify the selected exercises and the rationale for
their inclusion before adding them into programs (in later chapters).
foundational movement : squat
although we have an exercise generally called a squat (typically referring to
barbell back squat), its more accurate to think of it as a movement with many
variations. this is more of a knee-dominant movement that often results in the
shins and torso being nearly parallel at the end of the range of motion (rom).
ggoobblleett ssqquuaatt
this pure squat movement allows you to focus on creating internal tension
and controlling every aspect of the exercise.
equipment
kettlebell or dumbbell
setup
 grab one horn of the kettlebell (kb) with each hand using a neutral
(palms-facing) grip.
 stand in a comfortable squat stance and bring the hands up to chest
height.
 squeeze the pectoralis and latissimus dorsi muscles to create tension (a).
execution
 draw your body down by flexing at the knees, ankles, and hips.
 stop when reaching your squat depth, such as the tops of your thighs
parallel to the ground (b).
 reverse the direction for the concentric movement.
coaching tips
 keep the shoulders tight and the implement locked against your upper
chest. youll be able to tell whether youre providing enough stabilizing
tension (by cocontracting your latissimus dorsi and pectoralis muscles),
because you should end up with a bit of an upper body pump by the time
you complete the set.
 perform in front of a mirror to gain visual cues about your technique
and depth.
 massive, muscular arms whole-body integration 
a
b
eelleevvaatteedd nnaarrrrooww--ssttaannccee,, qquuaadd--ffooccuusseedd,,
ssiinnggllee--rraacckk ssqquuaatt
equipment
kettlebell (alternative: light barbell) and two weight plates
setup
 grab the handle of the kb so the bell hangs down, resting against the
back (aka posterior) of your forearm.
 the rack position consists of having your arm nearly vertical and
pressed firmly into your side. the elbow will be flexed nearly maximally,
so that the forearm is also nearly vertical.
 your hand with the kb should be just in front of your pectoralis muscles.
 using a narrow stance and feet pointed forward (parallel to each other),
elevate your heels on plates to place more of the load on the anterior foot
and toes (a).
execution
 draw your body down by flexing at the knees, ankles, and hips.
 stop the eccentric movement when you reach a deep squat, as long as
you remain pain-free (b).
 reverse the direction for the concentric movement.
 extend your nonworking arm; you can place it at your side, slightly
abducted. this will be an organic arm position to help with balance and
should not be overcoached.
coaching tips
 this is a specific hypertrophy-based exercise that targets the teardrop
muscle (aka vastus medialis) like no other.
 although front loading is ideal to maintain more of a pure squat move-
ment, grip or shoulder fatigue might require you to use a light barbell
on your back.
 massive, muscular arms whole-body integration 
a
b
foundational movement : hinge
the hinge is often described simply as bending over, which conjures images
of imminent back pain. a more accurate description is pushing your hips
back to bend at the waist. even this subtle shift in focus from lower back to
hips causes a huge change in how this movement is perceived and performed.
figure . exemplifies the differences between the squat and hinge
movement patterns, along with representative exercises that fit along the
spectrum. this also helps to illustrate why, although barbell back squats
and deadlifts have their places, we are focused on purer versions of these
movements (i.e., goblet squats and romanian deadlifts [rdls]) as part of our
focus on arm training.
squat-hinge
movement spectrum
squat hinge
knee dominant hip dominant
knee
most least
bend
focus focus
on on
pulling pushing
hips hips
down ability to move back
weight
goblet front safety bar back trap bar sumo conventional rdl good
squat squat squat squat deadlift deadlift deadlift morning
squat movements between hinge movements
lower body push movements lower body pull
muscles muscles
lower back lower back
glutes glutes
quads hamstrings
figure . the squat-hinge movement spectrum.
reprinted by permission from dr.e j8o2h1n4 r/buasrirn/f..//mh-r3
rroommaanniiaann ddeeaaddlliifftt
the rdl is a pure hinge movement that allows you to focus on whole-body
stability and really squeeze the entire posterior chain (i.e., muscles running
from the back of your head all the way down to your heels).
equipment
barbell (alternative: anything)
setup
 grab the barbell at slightly wider than shoulder width with an overhand
grip.
 flex your knees slightly and maintain this flexion throughout (a).
execution
 squeeze your glutes and hamstrings to push your hips back to hinge.
 allow the load to hang close to your thighs, knees, and shins throughout (b).
 stop the movement at a comfortable depth, such as when the bar reaches
the bottom of your kneecap.
 reverse the movement to perform the concentric portion.
coaching tips
 although maintaining a flat back or slight lordotic curve is common to
nearly every exercise, it is worth emphasizing here.
 under normal circumstances, your grip strength wont limit your rdl
load, but it may be an issue because of your arm and grip-specific training.
use wrist straps or a hook grip to get around this at first. your strength
should increase quickly enough that it wont be a problem for long.
note
a hook grip is commonly used by olympic weightlifters to move heavy loads
very quickly, but in a pinch, it can be used for any grip-limiting exercise. it
consists of first wrapping your palm and thumb tightly around the implement
(e.g., a barbell) and then closing this grip by wrapping your fingers over
your thumb. you then use your fingers to further squeeze your thumb into
the bar. it doesnt feel great on your thumb, but its effective and you get
used to it. figure . illustrates the most common types of bar grips.
a b
a
b
c
d
figure . types of bar grips: (a) pronated, (b) supinated, (c) alternated,
and (d) hook (posterior vei8e2w14)/.barr/f03.//mh-r1
reprinted by permission from nsca, exercise technique for free weight and machine training,
by s. caufield and d. berninger, in essentials of strength training and conditioning, 4th ed.
(champaign, il: human kinetics, ), .
bbaallll hhaammssttrriinngg ccuurrll aanndd hhiipp eexxtteennssiioonn
you may recall that our arm muscles cross two joints (elbow and shoulder).
our leg muscles are anatomically similar. to address this idea, just as we
do with arms, this exercise gives us a twoferit hits the hamstring muscles
across two joints for the price of one.
equipment
stability ball (aka swiss ball)
setup
 lie face up with your heels and ankles on the ball.
 start with your pelvis on the ground (a).
execution
 progressively extend your hips and flex your knees to drive your pelvis
upward. this will roll the ball underneath you (b).
 when you can no longer move concentrically, reverse the direction for
the eccentric portion.
coaching tips
 perform the movements at each joint simultaneously (e.g., curl the ball
and extend your hips at the same time).
 you will likely need to reset the starting position a couple of times during
the set, because each rep could push the ball farther away from you.
 massive, muscular arms whole-body integration 
a
b
foundational movement : lunge
although potentially confusing, it is easiest to describe a lunge broadly as
single legfocused work that can fall into one of the following two primary
movements (both fall into the movement category of lunge):
 lunging, involves lifting and moving a foot during the exercise
 split squats, in which the feet do not move
rreevveerrssee lluunnggee
this exercise is often easier on the knees than forward lunging, during which
people (like me) often place too much emphasis on the rear leg (and after
many years grind their anterior cruciate ligament into a fine powder). rear
lunging provides all of the benefits with less potential for pain.
equipment
body weight (alternative: dumbbells)
setup
 establish your bottom position so you know roughly how far you are step-
ping back during the exercise. your working hip, knee, and ankle joints
will be at roughly  degrees each (aka -). note the placement and
position of the rear foot and leg.
 stand with your feet slightly wider than shoulder-width apart (a).
execution
 step backward as you draw yourself down using the tension of the work-
ing leg (b).
 contract the musculature of the working leg and hip to bring yourself
back to standing.
coaching tips
 your rear leg should only serve as a kickstand for support.
 ensure that youre using your working leg for the concentric movement
ignore the temptation to push off with your rear leg.
 massive, muscular arms whole-body integration 
a
b
bbuullggaarriiaann sspplliitt ssqquuaatt
once you have the technique mastered, you can really load this exercise up
for a powerful growth stimulus.
equipment
dumbbells (alternative: body weight or kettlebells)
setup
 establish your foot position by first finding your bottom position.
 with the support leg behind you elevated on a bench, your working leg
will be at roughly -.
execution
 starting with your knee fully extended (a), draw yourself down using
the musculature of your working leg.
 when you reach your established ending position (b), use your working
limb (including hip) to perform the concentric portion.
 allow your arms to hang straight down at your sides throughout.
coaching tips
 your rear leg should only serve as a kickstand for support.
 ensure that youre using your working leg for the concentric portion of
the exerciseignore the temptation to push off with your rear leg.
 the top of your rear foot can be used for additional support if balance
or toe pain are problematic. just be sure to use a padded bench, folded
towel, etc. under that very bony part of your foot.
 massive, muscular arms whole-body integration 
a
b
foundational movement : push
the upper body push is broken down into the following two movement planes:
 horizontal, which can be represented by the bench press
 vertical, is exemplified by an overhead press
pressing is going to create the greatest challenge to the arm-training
program because youre already doing so much of it during arm sessions. this
is a great example of the need for strategic exercise selection and integration.
the dumbbell pectoralis fly exhibits a near-perfect opposite-strength curve
from the dumbbell lateral raise discussed in chapter . they both have an
extreme force delta, but the fly provides the greatest load at the start of the
concentric portion. this is problematic for two reasons:
 the working muscles are typically stretched at this point.
 the shoulder joint is in a somewhat vulnerable positionespecially as
your arm drops below horizontal (toward the ground). remember, your
shoulder is as stable as a ball balanced on a dolphins nose.
you might like the feel of the loaded stretch at the bottom of a fly, or you
may have even been instructed to make this stretch happen, but this type of
unstable loaded stretching is contraindicated.
another problem with having this vulnerable position at the end of the
eccentric rom, which is the momentum that is commonly generated during
the descent. it may happen because were in a hurry to feel tension on the
muscle, and the first half of the descent is relatively tension free. the result
is that we pick up a little more speed at first and try to slow this down as we
begin to feel the pectoralis and shoulder muscles working. it can be subtle,
but any additional load at a vulnerable and unstable position could push us
past the integrity of the joint. this can be especially true as our stabilizer
muscles fatigue, when even a momentary loss in stability could result in
injury in this position.
ive attempted to fix the extreme force delta and generate tension at the top
of the fly, by squeezing the dumbbells together for an isometric contraction.
after playing with this for a couple of years, i came to realize that we can
perform an identical contraction at any time by simply pushing our hands
together; using dumbbells does not confer a magic benefit to this action. in
other words, this little trick didnt solve any the fundamental problems with
the pectoralis fly.
for these reasons, performing the pectoralis fly movement with cables,
elastic resistance, or machines is preferred to dumbbells. preview: well
explore the biggest upgrade to dumbbell flys in chapter  (nontraditional
exercises).
hhoorriizzoonnttaallccaabbllee ffllyy
theres really no way to eliminate shoulder and triceps work from pressing,
so the compromise will be to use banded, cable, or machine-based flys.
equipment
cable apparatus and d-handles (alternative: band, machine)
setup
 center yourself between two opposing cable machines.
 set the position of the d-handles at roughly shoulder height.
 with a hand gripping each handle, step forward as necessary so that
there is tension on the pectoralis muscles in this lengthened position.
your elbows should be slightly flexed throughout to eliminate inadvertent
loaded stretching of your biceps (a).
execution
 squeeze your pectoralis muscles to bring your arms across your body in
front of you (i.e., horizontally adduct your arms) (b).
 stop when you are limited by the equipment, your body, or just before
you lose tension on the muscle.
 reverse the movement for the eccentric portion.
coaching tips
 as your hands approach each other, raise one and lower the other so
they can pass each other, and youll achieve a greater range of motion.
 alternate the path of each hand (above or below) with each rep.
 although your pectoralis muscles will be in a lengthened position at the
end of the eccentric portion, avoid the temptation to stretch under load.
 massive, muscular arms whole-body integration 
a
b
vveerrttiiccaallkkeettttlleebbeellll hhaallff kknneeeelliinngg
bboottttoommss--uupp pprreessss
as with horizontal pressing, the same challenge of prospective arm fatigue
applies for vertical movements. for this reason, we will use the bottoms-up
kb press. the bonus is that its not a compromisethis exercise is one of
the more effective ways to develop bulletproof shoulders.
equipment
kettlebell (alternative: band, dumbbell)
setup
 start in a kneeling position with each knee at  degrees. your front leg
will be at - (i.e.,  degrees each at the hip, knee, and ankle). your
rear leg will have the support of your knee and toes on the ground.
 for this exercise youll use a standard overhand grip on the handle of the
kb. the difference is that the bell of the kb will remain above your hand,
rather than hanging down as normal. trying to keep the kb inverted
will force you to maintain a vertical forearm and wrist (directly under
the kb) throughout.
 your nonworking arm will have the elbow extended and can be placed
at your side, slightly abducted. this will be an organic arm position to
help with balance and should not be overcoached.
 the working arm will be on the side of the rear leg.
 the starting position and degree of elbow flexion of the working arm will
be established organically by your need to keep your forearm vertical (a).
execution
 press the kb overhead to full elbow extension (b).
 reverse the direction for the eccentric portion.
 keep your shoulders aligned with (directly over) your hips throughout.
this will ensure that there is no unwanted rotation of the torso.
coaching tips
 perform this exercise in front of a mirror for visual feedback.
 you can add variety by performing this movement with the working arm
on the same side as the forward leg.
 the goal is to perform this exercise with stability and control to develop
movement mastery rather than trying to push big weight. if youre used
to other pressing movements, the instability of the inverted bell will
make your grip the greatest challenge at first. although youre going to
feel it in your grip, this weakness might actually reflect general shoulder
instability, which should improve within a training session or two. if it
doesnt, youre probably going way too heavy on this move. lastly, do not
use a hook grip for this exercise. instead, lighten the load and focus on
movement mastery.
a b
foundational movement : pull
in direct opposition to the pressing movement is the often-neglected upper
body pull. here were working to correct (or prevent) the traditional imbalance
in pressing to pulling training volume, because lets face it, were all too
focused on the mirror muscles.
in contrast to a few torso muscles that press, we have numerous back
muscles that will require a slightly higher volume to hit. this is why well
use two horizontal pulling exercises and one for vertical.
hhoorriizzoonnttaall ssuussppeennssiioonn hhiigghh--eellbbooww rrooww
equipment
suspension trainer (alternative: barbell anchored in a squat rack)
setup
 if youre new to this movement, begin by setting the handles at roughly
shoulder height. this can be lowered to increase resistance.
 establish your foot position relative to your hands, based on desired
resistance. the farther forward your feet are, the more horizontal your
body will be and the greater the challenge.
 grab the handles with an overhand (pronated) grip.
 start at the bottom of the movement so you can establish whole-body
tension with your elbows extended and shoulders slightly flexed (a).
execution
 drive your elbows back to perform the row, so that you end the move-
ment with your arms roughly perpendicular to your torso (hence the
descriptor, high elbow) (b).
 reverse the movement for the eccentric portion.
coaching tip
work to maintain a tall spine throughout the movement; this means no cheat-
ing with the head and neck.
 massive, muscular arms whole-body integration 
a
b
hhoorriizzoonnttaall ssiinnggllee--aarrmm
sseeaatteedd ccaabbllee rrooww
this exercise is selected over a one-arm dumbbell row in order to give your
core and lower body a bit of a break while allowing you to focus contracting
your back musculature
equipment
cable apparatus and d-handle, preferably seated cable row apparatus (alter-
native: machine)
setup
 leg position varies across machines, but the key is that you want some
knee flexion, which will result in your hip being flexed at greater than
 degrees.
 grab the d-handle in an overhand grip to develop tension with your
shoulder flexed and elbow extended. this is the starting position (a).
execution
 simultaneously drive your elbow back and rotate your wrist. at the end
of the concentric rom, your wrist position is in a neutral grip, so that if
you were performing this with both arms, your palms would be facing
each other (b).
 reverse these movements for the eccentric portion.
 maintain square shoulders (i.e., facing the weight stack) throughout. this
means that there should be no unwanted rotation of the torso.
coaching tips
 some movement of the hip is likely necessary for a full rom at the shoul-
der, but resist the overwhelming urge to use hip extension to move the
load.
 although your back musculature will be in a lengthened position at the
end of the eccentric movement, do not stretch the muscle under load.
 remember that you are trying to stimulate your muscle, so the previous
tips can be summarized as, watch what everybody else does and then
do the opposite.
 massive, muscular arms whole-body integration 
a
b
vveerrttiiccaallppuullll--ddoowwnn,, ppuullll--uupp
this exercise can hit your back musculature differently based on the angle
of your torso relative to the direction of the vertical cable. this version will
use a vertical torso with the vertical cable.
equipment
pull-down machine
setup
 establish your grip width based on where your hands will be at the end
of the concentric rom, with the goal of achieving the strongest contrac-
tions possible. as a memory aid, your forearms will be roughly vertical
in this position.
 with your arms overhead and your palms facing forward, grab the bar
with your fingers (a).
 sit with your lower body at -, and your thighs firmly supported by the
pads over their tops. stabilize this position by performing an isometric
seated calf raise to further press your thighs into the pads.
execution
 squeeze your back musculature and drive your elbows down to perform
the concentric portion (b).
 stop when your personal anatomy organically establishes the bottom posi-
tion (i.e., you wont be able to move any farther, irrespective of fatigue or
load). this is in contrast to focusing on relative bar position to establish
your rom (e.g., bringing the bar down to your clavicles).
 reverse the direction for the eccentric portion.
coaching tips
 maintain a roughly vertical torso throughout, by bracing and resisting
the urge to flex and extend at the hip throughout.
 although your back musculature will be in a lengthened position at the
end of the eccentric movement, do not stretch the muscle under load.
 whatever your strength level, youll always have an opportunity to work
on maximally contracting your back musculature. theres a lot going on
back there, so use your activation period to practice squeezing different
areas using a light load on pull-downs.
 far too many people use their arms to pull during this exercise, which
is especially detrimental during an arm-focused training phase.* to get
around this, your focus should be on driving your elbows down to your
*well see an exception to this with pull-ups in chapter .
sides, using your hands and fingers only as imaginary hooks. to really
get the feel for this, have a partner place his hands under your elbows
and resist you (i.e., he pushes upward) while you perform the concentric
movement (i.e., pushing your elbows downward) without weight.
a b
sidebarr
this machine-based exercise is commonly known as a lat pull-down
because it engages the large back muscles (i.e., the latissimus dorsi)
colloquially known as lats. unfortunately, most people have never
heard of this muscle group, so when they hear the exercise name,
their brain turns the sound lat into the closest thing it knows. this is
why you see people execute by first pulling the bar to their clavicles,
and then perform an awkward internal humerus rotation, trying to
pseudo-press the bar toward their thighs. as absurd as this seems, the
individual is simply performing the exercise that they heard described
as lap pull-downs. this is all-too-common occurrence serves as a
great reminder to be clear with your cueing. better yet, cue to ignore
the bar and execute with your focus on squeezing the back muscula-
ture to drive the elbows down. problem solved.
foundational movement : carry
a carry is simply moving your body through space under load, and this might
be the biggest compromise of any arm training program. theres a good chance
that your forearms and grip strength are already taking a beating on other
training days, so theres no need to add to this with carries. until you get a
feel for how fatigued your grip becomes, using wrist straps or at least a hook
grip is strongly recommended.
ssuuiittccaassee ccaarrrryy
performing a suitcase (single-arm) carry will allow you to lighten the load
on each hand while getting a killer carry session.
equipment
dumbbell or kettlebell
setup
 hold the load so that your arm hangs vertically at your side.
 stabilize your shoulder and torso before moving.
execution
 walk slowly and work to maintain a tall spine.
coaching tips
 sets are performed for duration or time rather than distance. this allows
you to focus on effective form, rather than hurrying to get to the end of
your route.
 it is very common to have a limited amount of runway, resulting in the
need for you to turn  degrees to reverse the direction. this loaded
whole-body rotation is an additional challenge and needs to be balanced
between left and right turns, otherwise instinct and habit will always
have you turn the same way. to counter this prospective imbalance, well
employ a trick i learned from power skating: always face the same wall
when making your turns. for example, if you perform a -degree right
turn during a carry, your next rotation should be to your left (toward
the same wall). if your time ends before you need to turn around, be
sure to end by facing the same direction in which you started. this may
mean that youll do another -degree turn facing the requisite wall,
immediately before putting down your load.
 massive, muscular arms whole-body integration 
wrap-up
weve covered a lot in this chapter, which is only fitting because it addresses
the entire body. if there was any lingering doubt about training beyond your
arms, that archaic thinking should now be gone. working with your bodys
integrated nature through whole-body training will not only enhance your
arm development, but it will also help you to mitigate injury risk and maintain
long-term physical function. this begins with bullet proofing your shoulders,
which are not only the most mobile joints, but they are directly related to
training your biarticular arm muscles. core strength was next on the list,
because its bullet proofing serves as a double win for your arm training and
everything else you do in life.
as a bridge between these body parts and the final key target, your
traditional warm-up was upgraded to an activation period. in contrast to the
traditionally passive obligation, this preparation time will help you dial in
your subsequent workout for a more effective muscle stimulus.
the key target of focus was introduced, beginning with the game-changing
idea of creating stability for strength. establishing whole-body tension by
screwing your limbs into the ground, bracing, and stabilizing the shoulder
will help your nervous system to take the brakes off your strength and thrive
during the lift. with enough practice, these components become automatic,
which will allow you to benefit from focusing on muscle contraction to move
your load. this internal locus of focus targets metabolic growth and really
helps you refine your mindmuscle connections.
lastly, the six foundational movement patterns were introduced along with
strategically selected exercises to enhance the performance of each. youll
not only notice the result of their incorporation in your arm musculature, but
youll feel it in everyday life.
part ii
tthhee eexxeerrcciisseess
this page intentionally left blank
ttrriicceeppss
eexxeerrcciisseess
although were living in a biceps-centric world, its likely that the triceps
muscles actually contribute a greater amount of your arm mass. so, if youre
looking for maximum size, triceps training is the best place to start. recall
that the triceps are a biarticular muscle group with the meaty, long head
crossing the shoulder joint. well take advantage of this through the use the
first key (anatomical targeting), by using a variety of pushing and pressing
movements, as well as different shoulder positions and grips.
triceps anatomical targeting
the first and most important application of key  is to select a variety
of exercises based on shoulder position. recall that the arm muscles are
biarticular (crossing both the shoulder and elbow joints), so along with elbow
flexion and extension, your shoulder position will affect the feel of contraction
and muscle fiber recruitment of each exercise. triceps exercises fall into
three main categories: anterior or elbow up, neutral or posterior, and pressing.
anterior or elbow up (henceforth referred to as anterior) exercises are
performed with the shoulder flexed so that your elbows are in front of you
or fully extended overhead. an example would be the overhead cable triceps
extension.
neutral or posterior (henceforth called neutral) exercises occur with the
elbows at your sides or behind your torso. an example would be standing
cable push-downs.
pressing consists of exercises that have a combined elbow and shoulder
movement (which will be referred to in the drill text as executions). an
example is a bench press.
three shoulder and elbow positions
 anterior or elbow up
 neutral
 pressing
if youre having trouble remembering which exercise falls into which
category, you can think of it as where your elbows go, relative to your torso
as they extend and flex during each exercise.
force transmission
palmar and pinky grips
a second application for key  pertains to the specific points of contact
between you and the implement. we are all creatures of habit and tend to grab
our implements in the same way during each exercise. by changing up your
grip, though, you may experience slightly different muscle fiber recruitment
and subsequent feel of contraction. one way to do this is by changing how
you grip dumbbells and the cable rope attachment (or v handle attachment)
for triceps training.
it is natural to grip a dumbbell at the center of the handle, which means
that the friction of our grip across our palm and fingers will transmit the force
we exert. this is referred to as a palmar grip (figure .1a). conversely, rope
attachments have a large knob or knot at the end to prevent your grip from
slipping. by gripping the rope just above this point and pushing against the
knob, much of the force is transmitted across the pinky finger side of your
hand. as you might expect, this is called the pinky grip (figure .1b).
as you continually improve your ability to contract different parts of each
muscle group, you will come to feel the difference in these two types of grip.
this is especially true when you perform dumbbell movements by resting the
pinky side of your hand against the end of a dumbbell (as you would the knob
on a rope), or when not using the knob on the rope (gripping as you would
a dumbbell). it really doesnt matter which grip youre using nowthe point
here is to mix it up to get all the feels!
preview
the specifics of grip and force transmission are also applicable to forearm
training and will be discussed in chapter .
force transmission
 palmar
 pinky
a b
figure . (a) palmar grip and (b) pinky grip.
triceps exercise descriptions
the most fundamental element of each exercise requires elbow extension
during the concentric portion of the movement, so i wont insult you by
perseverating that statement. other general reminders include the following:
 maintain core stability, stabilize tension (key target ), optimize stimulus
via contraction, and do not throw around excessive weight (key targets
 and ).
 for the triceps, you will maintain the palm position or grip that is initially
stated, unless otherwise noted.
 unlike biceps movements, triceps exercises often begin with the eccentric
portion of the rep, and this will be explicitly noted where applicable.
bbeenncchh pprreessss
it would be pretty hard to write about arm training without discussing the
bench press. it fits nicely in our wheelhouse, because in contrast to traditional
thinking, its more of a triceps exercise than a pectoralis exercise. despite
its ubiquity and the fact that an entire day of the week is devoted to its per-
formance (i.e., monday = international bench press day), the bench press is
actually an advanced, very technical movement. failure to appreciate this
has contributed to the decimation of shoulders common to gyms everywhere.
its important to note that the length of this description does not suggest
that this exercise is more important or effective (whatever that would mean).
instead, it reflects the frequent overuse of this advanced movement and
subsequent potential for chronic injury. well mitigate this to some extent
with the rusin three-way shoulder warm-up, but developing a high level of
technical proficiency is still necessary.
well detail several components of this exercise, but its important that
you dont try to execute everything at once. start by picking a couple of cues
and practice. if this seems excessively laborious to you, remember that this
is a process; even the biggest benchers on the planet are always working on
their technique!
setup
youve seen novices flop around on a bench as they try to move a too heavy
of a loadmaybe a leg comes up or the bar starts to rotate, until, hopefully,
they rack the thing. ive done this myself, but other than the obvious potential
for injury risk, it means that were also leaving a lot of strength potential on
the table. one of the biggest game changers for your bench will occur when
you develop the skill of maximizing body stability.
the most impactful way to increase stability is through leg drive, which
is exactly what it sounds like; you push with your legs to drive your upper
back into the bench (figure .). this was my first experience with targeted
stability, and although it takes practice, once you nail it, youll have another
oh, my goodness (omg) moment. you can replicate some of the feel for this
by putting your feet up on the bench and performing a glute bridge, trying
to force your upper back into the bench. now work on replicating this with
your feet on the ground. i have new clients perform the glute bridge before
each set as a tactile cuea reminder of the feel that theyre looking for. when
they can replicate this with their feet on the ground, they know that theyve
achieved full-body stability.
it shouldnt matter if your feet are flat on the ground as long as they are
bilaterally symmetrical (i.e., between right and left) and can maximize ten-
sion. also, your legs need a tight core through which they can transmit this
powerful stabilizing force, so bracing should be a no-brainer here. squeezing
your shoulder blades and then your lats together will provide upper body
stability throughout the entire range of motion (rom).
figure . to set up the bench press, push with your legs to drive your
upper back into the bench.
grip the bar and wrap your thumbs. squeeze the bar hard, try to externally
rotate at the shoulder, and pull the bar apart. the cue for this is that you are
trying to bend the bar (table .).
table . bench press checklist
component anatomy cue
stability legs leg drive
core tension brace
retract scapulae squeeze shoulder
blades together
thumb wrap thumb
grip squeeze hands crush the bar
externally rotate arm bend the bar
abduct arm pull the bar apart
pull-off lats pull toward your navel
sidebarr: fix your wrist
along with shoulders and elbows, the other common pain point during
the bench press happens at the wrist. the prospective solution begins
with targeted anatomy (as is so often the case). the more vertical the
downward force from the bar through your hand, wrist, and forearm,
the less wrist strain youll experience. the way to accomplish this is to
begin with a traditional wrist-extended position and then very slightly
flex the wrist. importantly, your wrists will still be in an extended
position; they just wont be as extended as they probably were. this
places more of the load directly above your forearm as opposed to
pushing back on your wrist joint. as a final safety note, you should
always feel as though you are in complete control of the bar. if this
perception is anything other than  percent, you may be flexing
your wrist too far, or you may not even need to do so at all. practice
in a squat rack with safety bars, and only employ the wrist flexion
tweak with heavier loads once youve developed confidence with this
skill using lighter weight.
once youve just put the effort into creating a stable surface to push
through, you dont want to lose it with a traditional lift off of the bar. you
want to pull the bar out of the rack toward your navel using your lats, rather
than lifting it off with a push. this will ensure that you maintain a tight back
and body stability. the best option here is to have a spotter or two set the bar
directly over your starting position.
grips and shoulder specificity
grip width has not been mentioned because it comes as a result of first finding
your optimal shoulder position. to achieve this, you will use the bottom of the
exercise, which is where you end the eccentric part of the rep and begin the
concentric part (figure .). your grip width will be established based on your
ability to achieve the most comfortable shoulder position at the bottom, while
keeping your forearms vertical. for most people, the bar will land between
the lower chest and upper abs, with the elbows abducted roughly  degrees
away from the body.
if you cannot find a grip and shoulder position without causing discomfort,
you may want to replace the bar with dumbbells, replace the bench with
push-ups, or eliminate this exercise altogether. you might think that this
statement is obvious, but from my own ego-driven experience (and subsequent
shoulder issues), the outdated dogma that you have to bench can be a powerful
psychological dinosaur.
figure . establish your grip width based on the most comfortable
shoulder position at the bottom; position your arms at  degrees away
from the midline of the body.
lastly, we should all give a nod of thanks to powerlifters for developing
these tips. in spite of this transfer, its also important to note that not every
bench press tip is applicable for arm development. ironically for us, many
powerlifting-based suggestions are intended to make the movement easier
or reduce the distance that the bar travels, which directly contradicts your
goal of stimulating muscle growth.
ddeecclliinnee eexxtteennssiioonn
the biarticular nature of this exercise allows for a strong recruitment of the
long head of the triceps.
equipment
dumbbells (or barbell)
setup
 lie on the decline bench with your arms extended and a neutral grip
(also known as [aka] palms facing) on the dumbbells (a).
 maintain a perpendicular arm angle to your torso so that they are not
completely vertical (relative to the ground), but angled slightly back
toward your head. this is the pre-eccentric starting position.
execution
 resist the eccentric part of the rep as your elbows flex (b).
 as you reverse the direction to perform the concentric part, work to
resist the instinct of moving your shoulder.
 before starting the next eccentric, ensure that your arms are in the
starting position, perpendicular to your torso.
coaching tip
the common error is allowing the arms to become vertical, which takes much
of the tension off the muscle across both joints. for maximum arm develop-
ment, avoid this instinct to rest and focus on stimulating the muscle.
 massive, muscular arms triceps exercises 
a
b
bbaannddeedd ppuusshh--uupp
adding the proper setup to push-ups turns this common exercise into a
whole other animal. you may be surprised by how challenging it can be for
your core. the use of a resistance band can make this an effective exercise
for even seasoned veterans.
equipment
elastic resistance and body weight
setup
 wrap the band behind your back under your armpits.
 grab the inside of the band in each palm so that it lies between your
thumb and fingers. the band should offer the strongest resistance at
maximal arm extension.
 start from kneeling position and place your palms on the ground slightly
wider than shoulder width at the height of your lower chest. this should
result in your elbows being approximately  degrees abducted (out to
your side) at the bottom of the rep.
 screw your hands into the ground with external rotation; the cue is that
youre trying to make the notch between your biceps and forearms (aka
the front of your elbow) face forward. this will usually need to be done
with some elbow flexion to take some tension out of the band.
 with your hands planted, step backward with one leg and drive your toes
into the ground for stability.
 repeat with the second leg and fire your core (a).
execution
 resist the eccentric part of the rep as your elbows flex and arms extend
during descent to the bottom position (b).
 reverse the direction to perform the concentric press.
variations
 body-weightonly push-ups are an incredibly effective exercise and can
be used if a band is unavailable or excessively difficult. the same exercise
description applies (with the obvious elimination).
 if a body-weight push-up cannot be executed with proper technique,
the movement can be made easier by elevating your hands, for example
pushing off of a bench or a wall. this allows you to maintain the full
technique, including the essential core and lower body tension.
coaching tips
 wrapping the band under your armpits will minimize the potential for
slippage as it loses tension.
 locking your body with stabilizing tension will ensure that you can drive
with maximal force on the push-up.
a
b
sseeaatteedd oovveerrhheeaadd eexxtteennssiioonn
performed with the arm overhead and internally rotated, this exercise pro-
vides a novel and powerful feel of contraction.
equipment
dumbbell (alternative: cable)
setup
 sit with your hips and knees at -degree angles and use both arms to
set the dumbbell overhead.
 the working arm begins at full extension, palm facing forward with the
dumbbell directly over the shoulder (a). your nonworking hand and arm
can help stabilize your core by grabbing and pressing against your abs.
execution
while maintaining an approximately vertical arm, perform the eccentric part
by resisting the load as your elbow flexes and the dumbbell moves behind
your head (b).
coaching tips
 although the goal is to maintain a vertical arm, some shoulder movement
is natural and inevitable.
 once you get a pump going, this is an incredibly motivating exercise
when performed in front of a mirror. more practically, the mirror pro-
vides visual feedback, so you can control the movement and contract the
triceps even better.
 massive, muscular arms triceps exercises 
a
b
ppiitt ssttaaiinn pprreessss
the memorable name of this exercise helps to maintain the cue of keeping
your arms locked to your sides, as though you were trying to hide armpit
stains in your shirt. although its called a press, its technically an elbow
extension exercise that has a strong isometric shoulder extension component.
equipment
high cable handles (alternative: bands)
setup
 stand at the center of two opposing cable attachments.
 grab the handles with an overhand grip and bring your elbows down to
your sides (i.e., externally rotate and adduct your humeri). your arms and
forearms will stay between your body and the weight stack throughout.
this is the starting position (a).
execution
 maintain your shoulder position by keeping your elbows at your sides, as
you extend your elbows to bring your hands down to your outer thighs (b).
 reverse the direction for the eccentric part.
coaching tips
 maintaining the isometric adduction helps to engage the long head of
the triceps.
 this can be performed with one arm at a time.
 massive, muscular arms triceps exercises 
a
b
mmooddiiffiieedd mmuussccllee--uupp
this movement is very similar to a traditional cable push-down, but in this
case the hands dont move, and your body rotates around them.
equipment
 squat rack
 barbell
 bench
setup
 anchor the bar in a squat rack at approximately shoulder height.
 place the bench close to the rack so you can stand on it in a partial
squat, leaning over onto the bar with elbows fully extended and hands
pronated on the bar.
execution
 begin the movement with your shoulders over the bar, arms vertical, and
toes supporting as much weight as you need on the bench (a).
 perform the eccentric part of the rep by resisting as gravity pulls you
down, causing elbow flexion and some movement at the shoulder (b).
 at the bottom of the movement (preconcentric), make sure your knees
are flexed behind you with the top of your foot or toes supporting you
on the bench.
 position your forearms vertically below the bar, which itself will be at
approximately chin height.
coaching tips
 although its designed to isolate the triceps, this movement is more
advanced and requires strength throughout your arms, core, upper
back, and legs. start off by performing the top third of the movement
and progressively increase your rom as you get stronger.
 elbow extension is the primary movement, but enough shoulder flexion
happens that this might be thought of as a partial pressing exercise.
 massive, muscular arms triceps exercises 
a
b
ccaabbllee ssuuppiinnaatteedd eexxtteennssiioonn ((oonnee aarrmm))
this is similar to a dumbbell triceps kickback, but the use of a cable and
supinated grip provides tension across the full rom.
equipment
high cable handle
setup
 face the weight stack and step laterally just enough that your working
arm and forearm are directly in line with the handle.
 reach up to grasp the handle with a supinated grip.
execution
 extend your shoulder to bring your elbow down to your side (a).
 maintain a vertical arm and extend at the elbow, bringing your hand
back and down to your outer thigh (b).
coaching tips
 the supinated grip allows for an unusually strong contraction, although
it can become hard to hold the handle as fatigue sets in and your grip
strength declines.
 to minimize the impact of grip on execution, use a relatively light weight
for this movement.
 massive, muscular arms triceps exercises 
a
b
ccrroossss ffaaccee eexxtteennssiioonn ((oonnee aarrmm))
this exercise is the supine (lying faceup) version of the overhead extension.
the forward shoulder position and internal rotation of the humerus provide
a novel stimulus for the triceps.
equipment
low cable handle (alternative: dumbbell)
setup
 lie faceup on a bench, holding a cable handle with a pronated grip and
elbow fully extended.
 your nonworking arm can help with stabilization by holding your abs.
execution
 start with the cable handle directly over your shoulder, point your elbow
out (i.e., internally rotate your humerus), and maintain this vertical arm
position throughout (a).
 perform the eccentric part by resisting elbow flexion, ending as the
handle nearly touches the opposite shoulder (b).
coaching tips
 in spite of the name, you are not literally crossing the cable or dumbbell
over your face for this exercise.
 if fatigue is causing your core stability or grip strength to suffer, hold
off on performing this exercise until your next workout when it can be
performed first (when you are fresh).
 massive, muscular arms triceps exercises 
a
b
ttiiggeerr bbeennddss
this versatile movement may be thought of as an extension-focused push-up.
equipment
body weight
setup
 start from kneeling position and place your forearms and palms on the
ground shoulder-width apart and parallel to each other.
 your hands should be just forward of your shoulders and elbows bent
just above  degrees (i.e., greatly flexed).
execution
 step backward with one leg and drive your toes into the ground for
stability.
 repeat with the second leg and fire your core (a).
 press from the bottom position with a hard, upward drive (b).
coaching tip
you can elevate your feet if you need to increase the load. be aware that
doing so may change your elbow angle, which is fine as long as it doesnt
cause discomfort.
 massive, muscular arms triceps exercises 
a
b
oovveerrhheeaadd rrooppee eexxtteennssiioonn
this exercise provides maximal tension at full shoulder and elbow flexion.
equipment
rope cable attachment (t-handle, etc.)
setup
 face the weight stack to grab the rope with both hands.
 turn  degrees to face away from the weight stack with your arms
overhead.
 step forward just enough for the load to develop tension on your triceps,
with your elbows flexed (a).
execution
 lean forward slightly and adopt a split stance for stability.
 maintain your arm position in line with your torso, so that your triceps
are next to your ears.
 extend at the elbow (b).
coaching tips
 it is natural to have to readjust your position after the first rep, as long as
youre stable for each subsequent rep. if you find that youre still moving
around, it is likely that you lack the core or shoulder strength to handle
that load and are potentially increasing your risk of injury. decrease the
weight and continue to work on strengthening your core.
 the stretched position across the shoulder and prolonged isometric
contraction help to stimulate the long head of the triceps.
 other cable attachments (such as a t-handle or straight bar attachment)
may be used to add variety to the muscle stimulation, although it may
be harder to achieve the starting position with them.
 massive, muscular arms triceps exercises 
a
b
bbeenncchh pprreessss lloocckkoouuttss ((aakkaa hhiigghh ppiinn pprreessss))
this is an excellent triceps-focused movement, especially for those who have
trouble locking out the bench press.
equipment
 barbell
 squat rack
setup
 place the safety bars of your squat rack at a height that will allow you to
perform roughly the top third (or less) of the movement.
 place the bar at this height as the starting position (a).
 follow the bench press checklist for your whole-body setup.
execution
 starting from the bottom position, perform the concentric end-range
rom of the bench press (b). reverse the movement for the eccentric
part of the rep.
 the bar should stop dead on the safety bars at the end of each rep (i.e.,
no bouncing).
coaching tips
 although the reduced rom will be easier on your shoulders and may
allow you to use a heavier load, that is not an excuse to throw around
excessive weight. in fact, a heavier load necessitates that you maintain
a tight core and lower body stability throughout.
 the exercises to which a pin press can extrapolate is only limited by the
use of the bar itself. stated differently, nearly any barbell movement can
employ the use of a partial rom and dead stop between reps.
variation
as a variation, hold the full extension (aka lockout) for a three-count.
 massive, muscular arms triceps exercises 
a
b
ccaabbllee ppuusshh--ddoowwnn
this classic exercise is surprisingly versatile, allowing you to use a variety of
shoulder positions and grips to hit the triceps in different ways.
equipment
high cable t-handle attachment (or rope, v handle, etc.)
setup
face the weight stack and grab the t-bar with a pronated grip (a).
execution
 bring your elbows down so that they are in line with your torso and
maintain this arm position throughout.
 lean forward and stagger your stance as needed for balance and stability.
 extend your elbows to perform the concentric part of the rep (b). reverse
the movement for the eccentric portion.
coaching tips
 when trying to maintain this movement as an extension, it is important
to fight the instinct to use shoulder involvement.
 increase your personal awareness of muscle contraction intensity by
trying to supinate or pronate at maximal extension. this makes a big
difference for some people, so be sure to try this during the warm-up
for each workout and see what works best for you.
variations
 a partial press variant, using some shoulder movement is a viable option
provided that this is done so consciously, and not as a result of using too
much weight.
 another variation uses the same elbow extension motion, but with the
shoulder maintained in a slightly flexed position at  degrees. keeping
your arms just in front of your torso (as opposed to vertical) while you
flex and extend the elbow will cause a strong activation of the long head
of the triceps. squeeze your lats and pull your shoulder blades down
throughout the entire set for maximal stability and muscle targeting.
 massive, muscular arms triceps exercises 
a
b
jjmm pprreessss
although incredibly effective, this advanced exercise, named after bench
press master jm blakley, uses several technique components. as a result,
this movement should be practiced under the verbal guidance of a spotter
starting with the lightest bar possible. it might take a few weeks to reach
your actual workout load, but the results will be worth it!
equipment
barbell (squat rack preferred)
setup
lie faceup on the bench, grab the bar with a shoulder-width grip, and extend
at the elbows to bring your hands over your shoulders (a).
execution
 perform the eccentric part of the rep by resisting the load as the elbows
flex and the shoulders slightly extend, bringing the bar toward your chin.
 your elbows will move outward (aka abduct) at roughly a -degree angle
from the midline of your body.
 as the bar descends, progressively flex your wrist to create maximal
tension at the bottom of the movement (b). this wrist cocking is the dif-
ference maker for this exercise. you have to experience it to appreciate it.
 ideally, you will let the end of the eccentric part of the rep occur natu-
rally when the forearm hits the biceps, but if not, end the eccentric part
when your forearms are nearly horizontal and your elbows are just above
chest level.
coaching tips
 this exercise should only be done with a spotter or in a squat rack with
safety bars. ideally, you should use both!
 you will feel this in your elbows, and although your tendons will adapt,
your muscle will do so more quickly. for this reason, this exercise is used
sparingly, giving your tendons a chance to catch up to your strength.
 massive, muscular arms triceps exercises 
a
b
dips overview
dips are pressing exercises during which you maintain a fixed hand position
and vertical torso and forearms, during which your arms flex and extend
behind you.
these exercises are best used to add variety to a program and develop better
feel for differences in contraction within the muscle. because your elbows
are behind you throughout the rom, this can create precarious position for
the shoulder. for this reason, dips are best used
 if you have shoulder prehab experience;
 using a limited rom (two thirds), starting from lockout (i.e., fully
extended elbows, pre-eccentric phase); or
 using a relatively light load.
the most common error that you need to be aware of happens when the
shoulders elevate (toward your ears) and roll forward during the movement.
this places a huge strain on the shoulder joint and is a position that should
be avoided. to counter this occurrence, use a light weight and focus on
keeping your shoulder blades pulled down toward your back pockets. this
will organically limit the potentially vulnerable end-range rom, which is a
good thing. note that increasing rom might actually feel good in the moment
because of the stretch across the shoulder and pectoralis muscles, but this
only serves to increase muscle and joint strain without further stimulating
your triceps.
ttrriicceeppss ddiippss
equipment
dip bars
setup
 place your hands on opposite sides of the bars, with your torso between
them.
 use a bench or step to get into a starting, fully locked-out position (a).
execution
 with your shoulder blades pulled down, resist the eccentric part of the
rep as you descend (b).
 reverse the movement for the concentric part.
coaching tips
 this version of dips usually uses a fixed neutral grip.
 a slight forward lean may be necessary to counterbalance your legs
behind you. an excessive forward lean might place more tension on your
shoulders and pectoral muscles, at the expense of the triceps that you
are trying to target.
 this exercise is particularly taxing on your shoulder stabilizers. use
it only if youve been performing shoulder prehab exercises for several
months.
 your body-weight load can be reduced by placing your feet on a bench
behind you. this also removes much of the requirement for core stabi-
lization, so be aware of the huge leap in difficulty when you progress to
full body weight.
 weight can be added by using a weight belt from which a plate is held
via a connecting chain.
 because of the precarious position of the shoulder joint, it is recom-
mended that the full range of motion (i.e., maximal) shoulder extension
be avoided. loaded stretching of a muscle is contraindicated.
a b
bbeenncchh ddiippss
equipment
two training benches
setup
 this exercise is performed with your hands pronated on a weight bench
positioned behind you.
 set your feet up on a second bench in front of you so that your legs are
straight (i.e., knees extended) and your hips flexed at roughly  degrees
(a).
execution
 starting at maximal extension (i.e., straight arms), resist as gravity pulls
you downward, flexing the elbows and extending the shoulder (b).
 reverse the direction for the concentric portion of the rep.
coaching tips
 your feet may stay on the ground to decrease the load and subsequent
difficulty.
 to make the exercise more challenging, a partner can gently add a plate
to your lap once your feet are elevated on the bench.
 massive, muscular arms triceps exercises 
a
b
wrap-up
the exercises shown in this chapter all require you to target your triceps
across a variety of shoulder positions and grips, for thorough muscle
stimulation. applying a more detailed setup and execution of the bench press
will help you to get more out of this advanced exercise and might just add to
your training longevity. other exercise upgrades, like those for the push-up,
will facilitate a stronger mindmuscle connection with your triceps, allowing
you to ultimately tap into every fiber for growth.
bbiicceeppss
eexxeerrcciisseess
you might imagine that the current state of biceps training is a good news,
bad news situation. the bad news (always start with the bad) is that the
biceps are among the most frequently trained muscle groups. the requisite
movement (elbow flexion) is basic, and all of the exercises have been done
to death. the more we train with these exercises, the less of an opportunity
we have for further growth.
the good news is that traditional biceps training has been largely reduced
to elbow flexion, which ignores the relatively complex anatomy of this muscle
group. this is actually great news, because it means that theres a huge amount
of untapped potential growth stimulation that your biceps are just begging for.
but dont balk at the idea of applying complex anatomy, because the
figurative heavy lifting has been done for you. your job is simply to apply the
concepts and feed your biceps the novel stimulus for growth.
targeted biceps training
shoulder position
similar to the triceps there are three shoulder positions that you will use
to anatomically target your biceps training. however, unlike the triceps, for
which the neutral and posterior are combined, these positions are distinct for
targeted biceps training. another distinction with biceps is that you do not
actively train movement of the shoulder (in contrast to triceps pressing). this
is because shoulder flexion is a very weak action for your arm musculature. as
a result, most of the load would be handled by the deltoids (anterior shoulder),
not your biceps, during this action.
youll employ exercises with different shoulder positions to create the
greatest amount of full range stimulation for your biceps.
three shoulder and elbow positions
 anterior or elbow up
 posterior or elbow back
 neutral
targeted biceps training
wrist position
another strategy to target the arms is through the use of three classifications
of wrist position and mobility.
 locked grip (also known as [aka] fixed wrist). the implement does
not allow your wrist to rotate.
 unlocked grip (aka open wrist). the implement allows your wrist to
rotate.
 pronated grip (including semipronated). with this grip, elbow flexion
exercises are performed with an overhand or neutral wrist position.
in this chapter well discuss the first two grips and save the third for the
forearm chapter. recall that the biceps not only flex the elbow and shoulder,
but they also supinate the forearm and wrist. by applying this concept with
different exercises, youll vary the recruitment of your arm musculature to
stimulate every fiber.
locked grip
the locked grip (figure .) happens when an implement forces you to
maintain a constant palm and wrist position throughout the entire range of
motion, which is best exemplified by a barbell biceps curl. your wrist cannot
rotate (supinate or pronate) as you perform the movement. this allows you to
focus mostly on elbow flexion, because youre already locked into a (typically)
supinated position.
you may grip cambered bars, like an ez curl bar using a slightly less
supinated grip, but because it is fixed, this is still a locked-grip implement.
note that although you can focus primarily on flexion, you will still probably
want to try to supinate for maximal biceps activation (i.e., isometrically), in
spite of the inability to actually rotate.
figure . locked grip.
unlocked grip
conversely, when the wrists are able to supinate or pronate throughout the
movement, it is called an unlocked grip (figure .). dumbbells and single-
handle cable attachments are great examples of implements that provide an
unlocked grip, but even a rope attachment qualifies as unlocked, because
some rotation can occur. this means that different implements will provide
different degrees of freedom for rotation. the result is that you will focus your
concentric contraction on both elbow flexion and achieving or maintaining
supination when using implements with an unlocked grip.
figure . unlocked grip.
pronated grip
the first two classifications are based on whether the implement grants you
the freedom to rotate your wrist, but the pronated grip classification is a
little different because it is based on using an overhand (pronated) or neutral
(with your palms facing each other; aka semipronated grip) grip, irrespective
of implement. due to their subsequent activation of the brachioradialis muscle,
exercises with this grip will be described in chapter  (forearm exercises).
personalized stability
shoulder lock technique
for biceps training, it turns out that the best stabilization device is your own
torso. when you brace your elbows in front of you, they are naturally forced
into your torso, effectively locking your arms in place (known as the shoulder
lock technique, figure .). this creates your own organic arm blaster, a
device that was popularized by arnold schwarzenegger in some of his most
impressive training pics.
figure . shoulder lock.
by stabilizing the humerus (upper arm bone) in this way, you prevent
shoulder movement and eliminate every bit of cheating at this joint. if youre
looking to maintain tension on the muscle throughout the full range of motion
(rom) for both time under tension and full-range mechanical loading, this
is the easiest way to hit key targets  and . this also allows you to put more
of your focus into isolated muscle contraction (key ), rather than having to
stabilize the load across multiple joints.
as a bonus, it also forces you to naturally stabilize your coreafter all,
your elbows are digging into you. if, however, you find yourself still leaning
back to heave up the load, youre using too much weight and putting yourself
at risk for injury.
this technique really shines when you are performing eccentric overload
reps, because that is the time that you want the greatest stability and focus
on the muscle. as the load increases, your elbow is only stabilized further by
being pressed more firmly into your core.
personalized grip width
carrying angle
look down at your arms and fully extend your elbows. although we think of
this is as a straight arm, you can see by straightening your fingers that they
are not directly in line with your humerus (figure .4a). they will be angled
away from the body, in line with your forearm. the resulting angle created
at your elbow by this difference in alignment between your arm and forearm
is known as your carrying angle.
its significant because this natural angle disappears as you flex the elbow,
so that your forearm and humerus become aligned (at the top of a curl, for
example, figure .4b). this means that the distance between your hands
naturally changes from the bottom to the top of a curl, which can become
challenging with locked-grip exercises. the natural change in distance between
hand positions when the elbow is fully extended (bottom) and fully flexed (top),
is called the grip delta. because the size of the carrying angle differs between
individuals, the grip delta can be huge in some people. this might result in
elbow pain when performing a locked movement, especially when using a grip
width that is traditionally selected using fully extended elbows (e.g., picking
up a bar from the ground, or from a rack at roughly waist height).
further, if youre executing curls using a wide grip based on carrying angle
(at the bottom of the movement), you can end up with an awkward ineffectual
flexed-end rom, rather than a tight, focused squeeze. in this situation, your
body is often just trying to figure out what its supposed to do, rather than
contracting your arm musculature. after some investigation, it turns out that
this is a surprisingly common phenomenon.
a b
figure . (a) straight arms and (b) flexed arms.
a b
figure . (a) establishing hand spacing with shoulder lock and (b) applying hand
spacing.
the solution to this is to choose your grip based on your hand spacing at
the peak contracted position. this works especially well with the shoulder
lock technique, which is naturally going to result in a narrower grip (figure
5a). your flexion will likely be stronger, and you should feel a better squeeze
of the biceps at peak rom (i.e., maximal elbow flexion grip (figure .5b).
although this anatomically targeted upgrade cant eliminate the grip
delta, youll probably find it easier to supinate at full extension with a slightly
narrower grip, compared to the more common situation (i.e., an excessively
wide top portion of the movement). if you find that this creates the opposite
problem, in that your fully extended position is awkwardly narrow, you can
choose a slightly wider grip and progressively work on extended supination.
importantly, theres no single grip width thats correct or incorrect; its
simply important to be aware of all of the tools available for your training
arsenal. some people find this one change makes a huge difference, so be sure
to play with different grip widths and the resulting intensity of contraction
throughout each exercise!
curl exercises
although were focused on the relatively simple motion of elbow flexion, recall
that the biceps cross the shoulder joint, which is the most mobile joint in the
body. this gives us an incredible variety of opportunities to apply key  by
changing joint angles in our efforts to tap the growth potential of every muscle
fiber. for example, if your shoulder is flexed so that youre in the elbow-up
position, this means that the biceps are slightly shorter across the shoulder
(figure .6a). conversely, when your arm is behind your torso (elbow back),
as it is for incline dumbbell curls, your biceps will be in a more a lengthened
position (figure .6b). in turn, this lengthened position changes the feel of
the contraction and fiber recruitment.
it is with this level of anatomical specificity that these exercises have
been selected to optimize your arm development. by providing locked and
unlocked grip variations, different shoulder positions, and implement choices,
youll experience a variety of resistances across the rom to reach even the
most stubborn fiber.
coaching tips and descriptions are provided along with the imagery for
each elbow flexion exercise. unless otherwise noted, the exercise description
will end immediately prior to the concentric phase, which you can universally
imagine as squeeze your biceps to flex your elbow and supinate, after which
you return to the starting position via the eccentric phase (by definition).
we want you to get to lifting rather than reading about it, so to further
eliminate redundancy, statements such as brace your core, create stabilizing
tension throughout your body, maintain shoulder position, keep your wrists
straight, dont be stupid by throwing weights around, and so on, are implied
for each exercise.
a
b
figure . (a) elbow up and (b) elbow back.
pprreeaacchheerr ccuurrll
this exercise provides stability for the arm and shoulder, which allows you
to focus on contracting the biceps.
equipment
barbell (alternative: dumbbells or machine)
setup
 anchor your arms fully against the pad, with your armpits on the top
of the pad (a).
 unless you have a partner handing you the weight, you will need to begin
this exercise with the eccentric contraction.
execution
 dig your elbows into the pad and create tension in your back to decrease
the risk of your shoulders rounding forward throughout the movement.
 with stabilizing tension being generated, resist the eccentric contrac-
tion as your elbows extend. stop in a bottom position that allows you to
maintain tension on the muscle (b). this is not necessarily full elbow
extension for everyone.
 reverse the movement for the concentric portion, stopping the movement
before you lose tension on the muscle.
coaching tips
 recall that this exercise can have an extreme force delta, with maximal
loading at the bottom (fully extended) portion of the rom. although
you can experience a great contraction with the muscle lengthened, this
should not turn into loaded stretching. use an rom specific to your abili-
ties and only work on biceps flexibility when youre not loaded.
 maximal flexion is also contraindicated because there is no tension on
the muscle through the top rom, so skip approximately the final 
degrees. people love to rest in this tension-free dead zone, so fight your
instinct and focus on the task of stimulating your muscle.
 maintain full arm contact with the bench throughout the full rom. your
shoulder should not move.
 theres no need to use a seat. supporting your body weight with your
arms and legs, by partially squatting, will allow you to drive your arms
into the pad for greater stability.
 the lengthened position of the muscle and potentially rounded forward
shoulder could result in mild shoulder strain. if you feel any discomfort
in the front of your shoulder, stop the exercise.
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a
b
ccaauullffiieelldd ccuurrll
introduced to me by strength coach scott caulfield, this innovative variation of
a preacher curl combines a stable arm position with an unusually high frontal
arm position. the resulting intensity of the contraction is hard to replicate.
equipment
low cable attachment (alternative: band)
setup
 sit facing the weight stack with your hips flexed at roughly  degrees
relative to your torso. this means that your knees will be close to your
torso and serve as a support for your arms as you curl (a).
 grasp the attachment, such as a t-bar or d-handles.
 lean forward and place your elbows on your knees as support.
execution
 beginning at full extension, flex your elbow to curl the load (b).
 maintain hip and shoulder angle throughout the set.
 reverse direction for the eccentric portion.
coaching tip
this elbows-up position is similar to a preacher curl but provides a more
consistent level of tension throughout the full rom.
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a
b
ssppiiddeerr ccuurrll ((aakkaa pprroonnee bbiicceeppss ccuurrll))
a stable frontal shoulder position provides versatility and allows you to focus
on contractions with the biceps in a doubly shortened position.
equipment
dumbbells (or barbell)
setup
grasp your dumbbells and lie face down on a bench that has been inclined
enough to allow you to reach full extension with your arms roughly perpen-
dicular to your torso (a).
execution
 beginning at full extension, flex your elbow to curl the load (b).
 you should have enough clearance that your implements do not touch
the ground throughout the set.
coaching tips
 create whole-body tension by pressing your feet into the ground.
although the key of stabilizing tension applies to every exercise, the
often-omitted leg drive is especially helpful here.
 if using a barbell, you will likely need to have a partner assist you in
order to set up safely.
variations
 experiment with different angles of bench and subsequent shoulder
position. although you want to maintain tension across the full rom,
this exercise affords some versatility with regard to starting shoulder
position and final elbow position (peak flexion).
 increase your amount shoulder flexion (starting with your arms a little
closer to your head) to create a shorter muscle length throughout which
you contract.
 start with your shoulder flexed, only to extend it (bring your arm back-
ward) toward your waist as you flex the elbow.
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a
b
bbeehhiinndd--tthhee--bbaacckk ssttaannddiinngg ccaabbllee ccuurrll
triple tension across the shoulder, elbow, and wrist makes this exercise a
fantastic addition to your training arsenal.
equipment
low cable attachment and single handle (e.g., d-handle; alternative: band)
setup
 grip a single handle and face away from the weight stack.
 step away from the load until there is tension on your arm at maximal
extension, with your hand at or just behind your hip (a).
 take a split stance for stability.
execution
 beginning at full extension, flex your elbow to curl the load while main-
taining shoulder position (b).
 maintain tension on the biceps and forearm throughout the set.
coaching tips
 this exercise offers resistance on your biceps throughout the full rom,
as well as a little isometric resistance across the shoulder and wrist.
 having the elbow slightly behind you so that the biceps are in a slightly
lengthened position at the shoulder allows for an intense peak contraction.
 experiment with swapping the leg position on the side of the working
arm. for example, if you naturally perform sets with this leg in front, try
performing the exercise with it as the rear leg.
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a
b
ccllaayyttoonn ccuurrll
this unusual three-phase exercise combines different elbow and shoulder
positions for a powerful eccentric movement.
equipment
low cable attachment
setup
 this is a three-phase exercise that starts by adopting a split stance with
the low cable attachment behind you.
 the hand on the side of your back leg starts ator just behindyour
hip (a).
execution
 imagine a pin connecting your elbow to the side of the body and maintain
this position as you flex the elbow to peak contraction (b).
 for the eccentric phase, you can imagine pushing your hand down just
forward of your hip, moving toward your front pocket (c).
 push your elbow forward slightly as your hand moves down an imaginary
vertical line.
 at full extension, allow your hand to return to the starting position
behind you, to perform another rep.
coaching tips
 this is a great novel contraction on the eccentric phase, as both the
elbow and shoulder move.
 the nature of this exercise requires that a light load be used, but that
does not diminish its effectiveness.
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a b
c
nniillssssoonn ccuurrll ((aakkaa cchhiinn--uupp ccuurrll))
similar to a chin-up, this exercise locks your forearms in place and places all
of the emphasis on your biceps.
equipment
 squat rack
 two barbells
setup
 set your safety bars just above shoulder height in a squat rack and place
a barbell on them at the back of the rack against the cage.
 set your second barbell up so that it rests on the barbell supports (often
known as j-cups or j-hooks) above the first barbell. the distance between
bars is determined by the length of your forearm.
 grip the top bar and rest your elbows against the bottom bar, locking
your forearms in place (a).
execution
 the movement is similar to a chin-up with your forearm braced against
the lower bar.
 from a hanging position under the bars, flex your elbows by squeezing
your biceps (b).
 due to the inherent difficulty, the initial set up allows you to use your
legs to provide as much assistance as necessary.
coaching tips
 as you become stronger, you will not need the support of your lower
body to perform this movement, in which case your initial setup can be
higher in the rack.
 this exercise is unusual in that the forearm and wrist are locked in posi-
tion, while the body moves around the elbow joint.
 stabilize your shoulders throughout this movement so they do not roll
forward, which may happen to provide the illusion of getting closer to
the bar at the top. this shoulder cheat will cause excessive, undesirable
stress on the biceps tendon across the shoulder.
 as your brain and muscle learn to coordinate to better perform this
exercise, you may want to deload much of the concentric portion with
your legs and use a partial rom throughout.
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a
b
ccoonncceennttrraattiioonn ccuurrll
once a punchline demonstrating the impotence of isolation exercises, the
concentration curl has emerged from the ashes as the thinking mans curl.
equipment
dumbbell (or low cable)
setup
 sit on a bench with your knees and ankles bent at  degrees.
 rest the back of your working arm on the inside of your thigh and place
your nonworking hand on your other knee for support (a).
execution
 squeeze your arm to flex the elbow.
 reverse the direction for the eccentric portion (b).
 maintain tension across the full rom; do not rest at the top or bottom.
coaching tips
 its hard to beat the level of peak contraction that this classic exercise
allows. this is due to the combination of arm stability, elbow-up (aka
shoulder-flexed) position, and cross-body movement (i.e., internally
rotated humerus) unique to this exercise.
 be sure to stare intently at your working biceps and imagine them becom-
ing as big as the austrian alps!
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a
b
hhaarrsskkii hhaammmmeerr ccuurrll
this innovative exercise uses a barbell to create the feel of a cross-body
dumbbell curl. better yet, elastic resistance allows you to maintain tension,
even at maximal rom.
equipment
 light barbell (mace bell preferred)
 elastic resistance band
setup
 one hand serves as support for the immobile end of the barbell, while
the hand of the working arm is supinated, gripping the other end of the
bar (a).
 the elastic resistance is looped over the end of the bar with the hand
of the working arm and is anchored low and in front of you so that it
produces maximal tension (i.e., it has the greatest amount of stretch) at
the top of your flexed rom.
 for example, if you were standing in the center of an imaginary clock
face (or compass) on the ground, the anchor would be at the : posi-
tion for your working right arm (alternative: ne position on a compass).
 the support arm is locked with its hand holding the immobile end of
the bell.
execution
 curl the bar with the working arm, slightly crossing the bar toward the
center of your body (b). as a cue, the hand of your working arm will
complete the concentric portion near the center of your chest.
 reverse the motion for the eccentric portion.
coaching tips
 this exercise is unusual in that it begins fully extended at your carrying
angle and the elbow flexes across the body.
 as the barbell or mace bell load progressively decreases as you flex your
elbow, the band tension increases to give you tension across the full rom.
 for safety, always maintain a small amount of tension in the band at its
shortest length. this will minimize the risk of having it become lax and
slip off the bar.
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a
b
ccaabbllee fflleexx ccuurrll ((aakkaa ddoouubbllee bbiicceeppss ppoossee))
if youve ever wanted to stare at yourself in a mirror while maximally con-
tracting your biceps against a load (and lets face it, you have), this is the
exercise for you.
equipment
two opposing high-cable attachments
setup
 this exercise replicates your first intentional biceps contraction, which
likely happened as a response to the verbal encouragement of make a
muscle! you may be more familiar with the bodybuilding parlance and
refer to it as the double biceps pose.
 grab the handle of each opposing high-cable attachment and center
yourself between the weight stacks (a).
 each arm should be roughly parallel to the ground throughout the move-
ments.
execution
 squeeze your biceps to flex your arms (b).
 reverse the direction for the eccentric portion.
coaching tips
 the high frontal shoulder position and external rotation of the arm pro-
vides a strong novel stimulus from the contraction.
 although its possible to perform a similar high-elbow cable movement
while facing the weight stack, the resulting instability makes it a less
effective stimulus.
 by using the opposing handles as counterweights, youre effectively
adding to the stability of this exercise. it also makes it very hard to cheat
during this exercise.
 performing this exercise in front of a mirror is not only incredibly moti-
vating, but it allows you to visually focus on the contraction.
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a
b
bbaarrbbeellll ccuurrll
this is probably the most basic form of biceps exercise and a great opportunity
to employ the shoulder lock technique.
equipment
barbell (straight or ez curl)
setup
 establish whether you are using the shoulder lock technique. if you are,
youll need to set your grip up with your hands closer together on the bar.
 after including the grip adjustment for shoulder lock, determine your
final grip width based on carrying angle, or its omission.
 grab the bar with a supinated grip.
 if you are using the shoulder lock, flex your shoulders slightly to bring
your arms forward and rest your arms against your core (a). otherwise
your arms can stay at your sides.
execution
 brace your core and contract your biceps to curl the bar (b).
 your elbows should not move unless youre intentionally experimenting
with the feel of contraction (see the first coaching tip that follows).
 resist the load as you reverse the direction for the eccentric portion.
coaching tips
 during your warm-up (or when using a light load) you can experiment
with the peak contraction (i.e., maximal flexion) by holding this posi-
tion for just a moment before pushing your elbows slightly forward for
a second, and then performing the eccentric portion. this elbow push
shortens the biceps across the shoulder joint, which provides a slightly
different contractile stimulus to the muscle.
 the elbow push should not be used to take tension off of the biceps. it is
used to stimulate, not serve as a rest.
 to ensure that youre not cheating by heaving the bar up with your back
(aka the lower back killer), use a split stance or brace yourself against a
solid vertical surface, like a pole or wall.
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a
b
ddrraagg ccuurrll
this exercise is a curl with a seemingly innocuous neutral shoulder position
that morphs into an artificially induced posterior shoulder position. this
exercise must be experienced to be fully appreciated.
equipment
barbell or smith machine
setup
this movement is similar to a standard barbell curl that uses a completely
vertical bar path (a).
execution
 flex your elbows and drag the bar up your torso (i.e., maintain close prox-
imity of the bar to your thighs and torso throughout the movement (b).
 you do not need to make the bar actually contact your body, provided
that the bar movement path is vertical.
 allow your elbows to naturally drive back and up as you flex at the elbow.
coaching tips
 this is an unusually intense contraction as your biceps flex at the elbow
while simultaneously lengthening across the shoulder. for this reason,
a lighter weight is used than would be for standard barbell curls.
 a smith machine is a great optional implement, because it locks you
into a vertical track and can be a great way to learn this counterintui-
tive bar path.
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a
b
iinncclliinnee ccuurrll
the incline curl is a biceps exercise that uses the rarely achieved posterior
shoulder position.
equipment
dumbbells (alternative: cable)
setup
 grab the dumbbells and sit back on an incline bench.
 let your arms hang vertically (a).
execution
 maintain this arm position as you flex at the elbow (b).
 reverse the movement for the eccentric portion, ending before you lose
resistance at the bottom.
coaching tips
 this exercise provides resistance through full rom, as long as you avoid
the instinct to let your arms rest at the bottom this is often done because
we like the feeling of a stretch, but the tension in the bottom position
should not be confused with resistance. further, loaded stretching is
contraindicated.
 the natural lengthened position of the biceps at the shoulder provides
an intense arm contraction.
variation: single-arm low-cable curl
 attach a single handle to a low a cable apparatus.
 face the bench away from the weight stack and grab the handle.
coaching tips
 note that rather than gravity pulling your arms down, the cable will
actually pull your arm back.
 this exercise is performed only for chasing the feel of a different muscle
contraction. this means that a very light load should be used, with an
intense focus on contracting the muscle.
 you may also need to focus on pushing your elbow forward slightly (to
create a vertical arm) to resist the cable from pulling you back. this
additional requirement adds a little more tension to the biceps and also
contributes to the need of reducing the weight.
 this exaggerated lengthening of the biceps might feel great at first, but
loaded stretching of the biceps and shoulder are potentially injurious
and therefore contraindicated.
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a
b
llooww--ccaabbllee ccrroossss--bbooddyy ccuurrll
this exercise provides a great cross-body contraction, but you should be
aware that it requires a large amount of shoulder stability.
equipment
two opposing low-cable attachments
setup
 grab the handle of each opposing low-cable attachment and center your-
self between the weight stacks.
 your palms should be facing forward, and your arms abducted at 
degrees from your torso (i.e., from the front, you should look like a peace
symbol) (a).
execution
 as you flex at the elbow, bringing your hands in front of you, just as they
do with any other curl (b).
 finish the concentric action when your hands nearly touch each pecto-
ralis muscle.
coaching tip
you may feel the instinct to cheat the movement by pushing your elbows
forward as you flex the elbow. be sure to minimize this shoulder flexion to
avoid turning this into a deltoid exercise at the expense of biceps stimulation.
 massive, muscular arms biceps exercises 
a
b
wrap-up
weve explored so much anatomical opportunity for growth in this chapter, you
might already be feeling a pump in your biceps. youve seen how changing both
shoulder angle and wrist rotation can affect your biceps activation rather than
causing mere elbow flexion. further, applying the shoulder lock technique and
grip delta allow you to use your own personalized anatomy for stimulating the
target musculature. using different movements and implements will ensure
that you can access every fiber, and youll get better with every rep.
ffoorreeaarrmm
eexxeerrcciisseess
if you were to ask me why were spending a whole chapter on forearms, id
answer: because theyre listed in the title of the book. but when i was done
laughing at my hilarious joke, id offer this sobering reality: forearms are
the most visible naked muscle group you have. as a bonus, developing your
grip strength will make you stronger in every other exercise. taken together,
the exercises in this section help you to perform and to make an impression.
if you need more convincing, as i did, consider the following.
perhaps the best way to pay homage to someone who has inspired your
training is to name an exercise after him. this has never been more applicable
than with strength coach and gym owner matt wenning. he is an elite
powerlifter who has achieved the inhuman milestone of a ,-pound (
kg) squat during which he stated that he could feel his femurs bow (pause
for a moment and let that sink in). but lets skip all of those achievements
(and contributions to this work) and name a forearm isolation exercise after
him: wenning wrist flicks.
the reason he deserves this tremendous honor can literally be felt when
you shake his hand; its surprisingly muscular. now you may have felt large
hands, or thick hands, but its unlikely that youve ever felt a muscular hand.
this adds another exclamation point to his already imposing physique. it also
provides another reason for you to train forearms and grip when youre trying
to make an impression: a firm handshake might imply confidence, but meaty
forearms and a strong handshake actively demonstratepower.
anatomical targets
there are dozens of muscles and joints in the hand and forearm, and the
amount of available detailed information is staggering. as i started to go
down the anatomical rabbit hole, a lesson from the legendary bruce lee
came to mind. although he had studied these same muscles and joints, he
omitted their inclusion in his opus the tao of jeet kune do. the reason was
that the application of such minutiae was limited, which necessitated focus
on broader, more practical elements. and so it is with this work. well target
the brachioradialis muscle and forearm flexors to help you develop the most
naked of all muscle groups and make a powerful impression.
consistent with most limb muscles, many of the forearm muscles are
biarticular. this means that we can anatomically target forearm training by
changing elbow, wrist, or hand position during different exercises. for the
sake of simplicity, it will suffice for you to merely be aware of that fact and
apply it on an as-needed basis. the following exercises will be an overview
from which you can vary at your discretion.
as with triceps training (chapter ), using a rope or dumbbell allows you to
vary your points of contact through which you transmit force to the implement
(and vice versa). changing your grip from a palmar grip (see figure .1a on
page ) and resting the index finger and thumb side of your hand against
the implement (an index and thumb grip) can alter the feel and muscle
activation of the exercise.
force transmission
 palmar
 index and thumb
if youre new to flexion exercises performed with a neutral or pronated
grip, its important to maintain awareness of the amount of work and degree
of stretch you experience across the brachioradialis throughout your training
program. this is especially important if youre new to incorporating pull-ups,
which can be very taxing on the brachioradialisparticularly at the fully
stretched bottom position.
similarly, although grip training can provide a massive upgrade for your
forearm mass and overall strength, hold off on performing too much of this
work as you start a new program. the novel stimulus may be enough to fatigue
your grip even without specifically training it, which could negatively affect
the rest of your lifts. as your grip strength and endurance naturally improve,
you can slowly add in more specific work to accelerate these processes.
things to remember
 as a general reminder, a palms-facing grip is also known as a neutral,
semipronated, or semisupinated grip.
 although youll still target your attentional focus on the muscle, you dont
want to waste energy trying to isolate small muscles to contract. youre
better off squeezing the general arm musculature to move the load and
stimulate the target muscles organically.
 perform grip training at the end of your workout. you wont be able to
do anything other than body-weight work if you cant grab the weight!
tthhiicckk--ggrriipp ttrraaiinniinngg
this isnt an exercise itself but rather a simple way to improve grip and fore-
arm development without major program changes. the trick is to enlarge
the diameter of any implement, like a dumbbell or barbell, which makes it
harder to hold and perform the exercise (see the below image of a thick-grip
dumbbell curl). the reason you would do this is to change the recruitment
of the primary muscles (krings et al. ) and increase grip strength and
forearm size. the additional benefit is that you will feel much stronger on
subsequent sets with a normal-diameter grip.
the best way to employ thick-grip training is to use a thick bar or by using
attachments specifically intended for this purpose. if you dont have access
to either of these, you can use anything that will fit snugly over your imple-
ment. in the past, ive used dense foam pipe coverings and tightly wrapped
hand towels, which are low cost and widely available.
the simplest implementation is to perform a single warm-up set of each
exercise with a thick grip. not only will this help to develop your grip strength
and forearm mass, but your work sets will feel far more locked in.
pprroonnaatteedd bbaarrbbeellll ccuurrll
this classic flexion exercise targets the brachioradialis muscle, which you
might recognize as the teardrop of the arm. teardrop is a common name
for the medial thigh muscle above the knee.
equipment
barbell
setup
grasp the bar with an overhand grip with your hands approximately shoulder-
width apart (a).
execution
 brace and squeeze your arm musculature to flex the elbow (i.e., curl
the bar) (b).
 maintain a straight wrist and vertical arm position throughout.
coaching tips
 during your warm-up (or when using a light load), you can experiment
with a false grip by keeping your thumb over the top of the bar with the
rest of your fingers.
 eliminating the thumb support during this movement changes the feel
of the contraction and places a greater load on your finger-specific grip.
 you should not be at risk of dropping the bar at any point.
a b
ccaabbllee hhaammmmeerr ccuurrll
as in a hammer grip, your palms face each other as you flex at the elbow
during this exercise. this grip allows you to target both the brachialis and
brachioradialis musculature.
equipment
low-cable rope attachment (alternative: dumbbells or band)
setup
 grip a rope anchored to the bottom of a cable apparatus.
 step away from the load until there is tension on your arms at maximal
extension (a).
execution
 maintain shoulder position and flex at the elbows (b).
 resist the load as you reverse the direction for the eccentric portion.
coaching tips
 this is a rare forearm exercise that allows for the use of the shoulder
lock technique, as discussed in chapter , biceps exercises. placing your
arms against your torso in this way will help to stabilize the shoulder,
minimize shoulder muscle fatigue, and allow you to focus on contracting
the working arm musculature.
 by your use of a cable attachment, this exercise will offer resistance
throughout the full range of motion (rom). dumbbells are also effective
but may allow you to lose tension at the bottom of the movement (i.e.,
extreme force delta). decrease the rom to maintain tension throughout.
 the dumbbell version of this exercise can be performed seated with back
support to minimize the sway of your body.
 experiment with using palmar and index and thumb grips for maximal
muscle targeting.
 massive, muscular arms forearm exercises 
a
b
xx--bbooddyy hhaammmmeerr ccuurrll
loaded flexing to see the full depth of your working arm musculature almost
makes a mirror required equipment for performing this exercise.
equipment
dumbbell (alternative: low-cable rope attachment or band)
setup
at full elbow extension, pronate the wrist holding the dumbbell, so that your
elbow is pointing away from your body (i.e., internal rotation). this is the
starting position (a).
execution
 flex the elbow to bring the dumbbell across your body so it ends near
the center of your chest (b).
 resist the load to reverse the movement for the eccentric phase.
coaching tips
 instinctively, you may want to use alternating curls, in which you perform
a rep with one arm, followed by a rep using the other arm. this makes
the exercise easier by allowing the working muscles rest between reps.
this is not positive or negative, but rather a variable you should be aware
of when trying to optimize stimulation of muscle growth.
 this exercise has the potential for an extreme force delta. you may want
to decrease the rom away from the start of the movement so that the
muscle does not lose tension at the bottom.
variation
this exercise can be performed as a concentration curl. perform the exercise
seated with your elbow resting inside of your knee. this will ensure that ten-
sion is maintained throughout the full rom.
 massive, muscular arms forearm exercises 
a
b
ccrruusshh ccuurrll
this single exercise combines two types of equipment to deliver several
different contractions. it offers a ton of novel stimuli and will feel spicy
throughout your arms, shoulders, and chest.
equipment
 medicine ball
 elastic resistance band
setup
 anchor one end of a resistance band at floor level and wrap the other
end of the loop around a medicine ball.
 grab the sides of the medicine ball with an open hand using a neutral
grip so that one side of the band runs across each palm (to ensure that
the band doesnt slip off of the medicine ball) (a). this is similar to how
you would hold a basketball.
execution
 squeeze your hands together as you perform elbow flexion (b).
 the squeeze helps you to maintain stability of the medicine ball and to
anchor the band.
 the cue here is to try to crush the medicine ball as though it were a
watermelon (or any fruit that you want to crush, for whatever reason).
coaching tips
 establish your distance from the band anchor point so that there is no
slack at the bottom of the exercise and it reaches roughly a -degree
angle at peak flexion.
 because of the intense crushing forces, this exercise causes a great pump
in your chest and shoulders, as well as your arms.
 massive, muscular arms forearm exercises 
a
b
bbeehhiinndd--tthhee--bbaacckk wwrriisstt ccuurrll
this is a very small rom movement that lets you focus on contracting the
wrist flexors of the forearm.
equipment
barbell
setup
 rack a barbell just below waist height and face away from the bar.
 turn your palms toward the bar (i.e., pronate them), back yourself into
the bar to grab it, brace your core, and unrack the barbell.
 the movement begins with your wrist in line with your forearm (i.e.,
straight) (a), from which you perform a concentric wrist flexion.
execution
 while maintaining a stable body position, squeeze your forearm flexors
to curl the bar (b).
 reverse direction of the movement for the eccentric portion.
coaching tip
although the rom is quite small, there are a lot of muscles working during
this exercise. be sure to experiment with the contractions to develop a
heightened awareness of these muscles and establish your own strengths,
weakness, and preferences. for example, you can try to supinate or pronate
(even though your grip is locked) at the top or focus on squeezing more with
your pinky or index finger.
variations
 you can anatomically target the biarticular forearm muscles by using a
neutral grip variation of the wrist curl. you will use dumbbells or kettle-
bells, with your arms hanging straight down at your sides. rather than
walk forward in this traditional dumbbell carry position, simply flex
your wrists.
 let the bar roll down your fingers into a false grip at the end of each
rep. in doing so, there should never be a risk of the bar actually slipping
out of your hands.
 massive, muscular arms forearm exercises 
a
b
wweennnniinngg wwrriisstt fflliicckkss ((aakkaa hhaannddsshhaakkee ccuurrll))
do not be intimidated by the mighty sound of flicking your wrist. your fore-
arms are worthy of this isolation exercise.
equipment
kettlebell (alternative: dumbbell)
setup
 imagine that you lock the flexed elbow at  degrees and perform a
handshake motion at the wrist, with an open hand and neutral grip. when
you point your fingers up and your thumb toward you, this is known as
radial deviation. the opposite motion (in which you point your fingers
down) is called ulnar deviation, and these movements are a great way
to think of this next exercise.
 sit on a bench with your forearms resting on your thighs so that your
wrists are free to move.
 grab a kettlebell by the horns with a neutral grip so that it is inverted
(a). this is the radially deviated starting position from which you begin
the eccentric portion of the rep.
execution
 resist the eccentric ulnar deviation so that the bottom of the bell dips
downward and faces away from you (b).
 reverse the direction for the concentric portion of the rep.
coaching tip
as you get stronger, you can perform this with one hand gripping the handle
of the bell, maintaining a neutral grip.
 massive, muscular arms forearm exercises 
a
b
pprroonnaatteedd dduummbbbbeellll ccuurrll wwiitthh iinnddeexx
aanndd tthhuummbb ggrriipp
the execution is nearly identical to the barbell reverse curl, but the unlocked
grip provides the additional challenge of having to stabilize your wrist posi-
tion throughout. in fact, this exercise is excellent for anatomically targeting
the pronator muscles of the forearm.
equipment
dumbbells
setup
 use a thumb and index grip on the dumbbell, even though you are pro-
nated. this intentionally imbalanced grip results in having more load
on the outside (pinky side) of the dumbbell, which forces your pronator
muscles to resist supination throughout the movement.
 begin with your elbows fully extended (a).
execution
flex your elbows while maintaining shoulder and wrist position (b).
coaching tips
 the force potential of elbow flexion is much greater than that of prona-
tion, so your pronation strength and endurance will largely determine
the load. this means that you will need to use a relatively light load the
first few times you perform this exercise.
 this exercise can be taxing on your grip, so perform it early in your
workout before fatigue sets in.
variations
 initiate the movement using a neutral grip at the bottom (full elbow
extension).
 pronate as you flex the elbow. this requires active contraction of the
pronators, as opposed to an isometric hold.
 progressively rotate your wrist during the eccentric motion so you end
the movement once again with a neutral grip.
coaching tips
 this starting wrist position gives the exercise an extreme force delta,
with zero force on the muscle in the bottom neutral grip position. you
may need to use a slightly frontal shoulder position to ensure that you
maintain tension on the arm musculature at the bottom of the exercise.
 alternatively, you can by avoid full elbow extension, limiting the rom
to that during which you maintain tension.
 massive, muscular arms forearm exercises 
a
b
ppllaattee ppiinncchhiissoommeettrriicc hhoolldd
this simple isometric exercise trains a common type of grip and gives you
an excuse to make a lot of noise in your gym.
equipment
metal training plates
setup
 put two metal plates together so the flat side of each is facing outward.
 using one hand, while seated, grip the plates so that they hang straight
down beside you, below your thigh. grip the plates between your flat
(extended) fingers and your thumb.
 these contact points of your hand will each pinch against one plate, and
the force of that grip will hold the plates together.
 as you might expect, this type of grip is known as a pinch grip. you can
imagine the homologous action of a crab claw or pincer.
execution
 while seated with your arm hanging straight down (so that your hands
are positioned below the level of your glutes, pinch the plates together.
 hold for time.
coaching tips
 perform this exercise last during your workout, because it will absolutely
fry your grip.
 the seated position decreases the distance that the plates will drop, in
the event of a slippage (which happens on occasion). although the drop
is a noisy event, sitting also minimizes the risk of the iron falling onto
your foot (or that of others).
 this is a completely isometric movement so you can be creative with
your implementation to maintain variety. along with mixing up the load,
using different plates can change the grip width at which you produce
the necessary force. for example, holding  pounds (. kg) using
three -pound (. kg) plates feels a lot harder than holding - and
-pound (. and . kg) plates together.
 massive, muscular arms forearm exercises 
bbaannddeedd ccaarrrriieess aanndd vvaarriiaattiioonnss
if youre looking for a different type of grip killer, adding bands to your car-
ries might be just what youre looking for.
equipment
 elastic resistance band or towel
 plate or kettlebell
setup
 loop a band through a plate or handle of a kettlebell.
 place each of the loops over the palm of your hand and wrap your fingers
(i.e., hold the band in a crush grip).
 stand with your arms hanging at your sides and the band-supported
load below your hands (a).
execution
maintain a fully erect spine and walk slowly with the load.
coaching tips
 the bouncing caused by band and the hanging load will create a height-
ened need for stability for your grip and throughout your entire body.
 you will need to walk slowly.
 you will need to walk smoothly. if you dont know what this means, you
will when you perform this exercise.
variations
 a pinky grip can be used to hold the band, which will require you to
maintain ulnar deviation throughout the movement. this provides a
very intense isometric forearm contraction and may necessitate using a
lighter load at first.
 a towel can be used to support the load instead of a band. although it
does not produce as much instability, you are exclusively using a palmar
crush grip to hold the load. this means that you dont have the support
of your hand anatomy, on which the towel could rest (as it does when
using a band).
 if the load is closest to the thumb side, you can experiment with main-
taining ulnar deviation or keeping your wrists straight during the carry.
the latter will cause the towel to transmit the force of the load over your
index finger. this adds a variation to your grip challenge and causes you
to isometrically resist ulnar deviation throughout.
 if the load is closest to your pinky finger, you may be most comfortable
performing the carry with neutral wrists (b). you can experiment with
ulnar or radial deviation provided that it does not cause wrist discomfort.
 instinctively, you may want to try the towel variations using a resistance
band. this is not recommended because only the friction of your grip
holds the load, and sweat can make the rubber of the band very slippery.
if the load slips, its headed straight toward your foot.
a
b
wrap-up
weve taken lessons from matt wenning and bruce lee to find some of the
biggest bangs for your buckanatomically targeted forearm exercises.
although these muscles dont get the love and attention that the biceps
and triceps earn, there are few other muscles capable of creating such an
immediate impression. along with building the in-your-face visibility of your
forearms, generating a stronger grip with these exercises will help you not
only with the rest of your training, but also in everyday life.
nnoonnttrraaddiittiioonnaall
eexxeerrcciisseess
it may be difficult to imagine a time before hip thrusters and glute bridges
were commonly seen in gyms around the world. but it wasnt too long ago,
before dr. bret contreras popularized these movements, that they were
considered to be nontraditional. in fact, they were often seen as throwbacks
to 1980s aerobics studios and toning for tight tushies. the overt sexual nature
of these movements generated more than a couple of giggles directed toward
the early adopters who performed them. but as you know, that perception has
completely changed. this same evolutionary thought process, from rejection
to acceptance, also happened for the reintroduction of kettlebells (to north
america), calisthenics, and breathing exercises. now these and countless
others are commonplace.
its important to keep this evolution in mind when learning about and
subsequently applying nontraditional techniques. you may get a strange
look from someone at the gym when you use them, but this is typically not of
concern to early adopters like yourself. you know that the focus is on muscle
stimulation and finding the best methods to do so, even if they are a few years
ahead of achieving traditional status.
the following exercises began with the end goal of optimizing muscle
growth and strength. as a result of this reverse engineering, they go beyond
the traditional: concentric and eccentric movements, sets and reps, performed
against a gravity resistance. these exercises will help your brain and muscles
work together in news ways, which you will experience as rapid gains. they
will also refresh your understanding of basic concepts, like contraction,
resistance, and strength. although it may sound daunting, the very best part
of this application is that youre going to have fun while doing it. lets go!
accommodating resistance using
bands and chains
an effective and increasingly popular training technique employs a concept
known as accommodating resistance. this term applies when the force
of the resistance changes throughout the exercise, as a result of your action
against it. the best examples of this include elastic resistance and chains,
through which the load progressively increases through the concentric
range of motion.* because the tension changes as a result of distance, these
techniques are known as spatially accommodating resistance. weve
seen a few examples of exercises with bands, but really they can be used as
a variant with any barbell movement. classic examples include the bench
press and standing biceps curl. adding chains to the bar is similar, although
they will always remain vertical.
chains hang from the bar (often attached to a smaller chain looped over the
bar), starting with most of the links lying on the ground. as you lift the bar,
more links come off the ground, progressively adding to your concentric load.
accommodating resistanceapplied intent
just one more way in which you can benefit from key  (targeted focus)
happens when you try to contract your muscle rapidly during a rep, in order
to activate as many fibers as possible. the idea was reinforced by landmark
research from behm and sale (), who showed that gains were contingent
on intent to contract, irrespective of actual movement. this means that you
want to try to move quickly, no matter whats happening with the actual
movement.
this is where accommodating resistance comes into play, because we are
unable to apply this intent with gravity-based implements. if we were to try,
the rapid acceleration of the load would cause momentum to quickly take
over and youd have to focus more on stopping the load. the good news is
that you can take full advantage of this muscle activation technique through
the use of the various accommodating resistance techniques shown in this
chapter. for example, you will reap the greatest benefit when you try to
accelerate concentrically during a banded biceps curl or against isokinetic
eccentric resistance.
*we focus on anchoring bands from below, but they can also be hung from above to
provide a deload at the bottom of the range of motion (rom), as exemplified by arm-
focused pull-ups in chapter . either way, the same principle applies: progressively
increasing resistance throughout the concentric rom.
another benefit of accommodating resistance is that it allows you to change
the strength curve of an exercise, so youre challenged at different parts of the
movement. an ideal example would be to change an exercise that normally has
an extreme force delta so that youd be able to maintain tension throughout
the full range of motion (rom). if you were to perform preacher curls with
a band anchored in front of you, the result would be that you would have
tension at the top of the movement (when the band is maximally stretched).
lastly, they can just be a great psychological change from traditional training.
things to remember
 bands wear out and eventually break. be sure to inspect them for wear
before every use.
 when anchoring bands, ensure that the anchor point is stable. do not have
another human hold the band to anchor it (for me and a colleague, this
point was emphasized when the colleague found himself with a broken
nose by as a result of doing so).
 chains are a pain to haul around between workouts because they can be
very heavy (which really is the point). they are also very noisy, which is
why some gyms do not allow their use.
 chains will naturally oscillate as you perform the lift, which can be an
interesting novel stimulus if it is managed. you can minimize unwanted
movement by ensuring that some length of chain remains on the ground
throughout the entire lift, which adds a little stability.
bbaannddeedd pprreeaacchheerr ccuurrll
there are few exercises that benefit you more from the addition of elastic
accommodating resistance. because this exercise has an extreme force delta,
typically resulting in a rest period at maximal flexion, the band helps to reveal
any weaknesses youve induced created by this instinct. the magnitude of
the stress stimulus and resulting growth makes it worth the pain of the setup
and execution.
equipment
barbell and band(s)
setup
 loop one or two bands around or through a stable low anchor point, so
that they will stretch maximally at your maximal elbow flexion.
 loop the ends of the bands symmetrically onto the bar to provide bal-
anced resistance.
 grip the bar and sit back so that your arms are fully in contact with the
pad (a). note that this does not mean that you should sit down on a seat.
execution
 flex the elbow to curl the weight (b).
 maintain shoulder and arm position throughout.
coaching tips
 if it is not possible to perform the movement without developing slack
in the bands at maximal extension (i.e., the bottom of the movement),
simply end the rom just prior to this point.
 focus your intent on contracting the muscle quickly. although you might
perform the concentric movement faster than normal on the first few
reps, the bands will eliminate the momentum at the top of the movement.
 the bands not only increase tension throughout the movement, but they
might increase time under tension if youve been resting at the top. this
will create a surprising degree of fatigue and subsequent stimulus, so be
sure to start with the lightest bands and reduce your standard training
weight.
 if youre experienced with standard preacher curls, the addition of the
bands will completely change the feel of the exercise. this is especially
true if you perform the traditional preacher rest at the top of the move-
ment. the bands not only eliminate the undesirable rest, but they create
maximal tension at this point.
 massive, muscular arms nontraditional exercises 
a
b
bbaannddeedd ttrriicceeppss ppuusshh--ddoowwnn
spatially accommodating resistance can be used with other types of resistance
or on its own. a one-arm push-down is a great example of how solo band work
can provide unique advantages for your growth.
equipment
band
setup
 loop one end of a band around a stable, high-anchor point.
 face the band.
 using a neutral grip, place your hand inside the bottom of the hanging
loop, using a pinky grip to transmit force during execution. wrap your
fingers around the palm side of the band for stability (a). your arm should
be roughly vertical with your elbow at your side.
execution
maintain shoulder position and quickly extend your elbow by flexing your
triceps.
coaching tips
 using a neutral pinky grip is helpful to support the resistance across the
wrist. other grips can be used but will require greater wrist stability.
 for eccentric overload, the nonworking arm can help to achieve maxi-
mal extension (b), after which the working arm performs the eccentric
movement alone.
 the eccentric overload can be exaggerated further by stretching the
band while maintaining the fully extended position with the nonworking
hand. for example, with your elbow extended you could step backward
away from the anchor point, bend at the waist, or partially squat. once
the band is stretched to the desired length, the working arm performs
the eccentric movement alone. return to the starting standing position,
with minimal tension on the band for another rep.
 massive, muscular arms nontraditional exercises 
a
b
accommodating resistance using
the treadmill
in previous chapters we discussed the eccentric paradox, which reflects the
fact that were stronger eccentrically but almost always exert less force during
this phase. this means that were leaving a lot of natural strength and growth
stimulus on the table every time we perform a rep. in an attempt to tap into
this growth potential, computer-controlled machines have been developed to
move the bar at a predetermined speed, no matter how hard you push. imagine
a seated bench press that performs the exercise by itself! your goal would be
to sit on the machine as normal and push against the moving handles.
these machines are called isokinetic equipment (iso = same, kinetic =
movement) and have been used in the physical therapy setting for decades.
although they solve the eccentric paradox, they are prohibitively expensive,
which forces us to put our innovation hat on and find our own isokinetic
workaround.
the solution is to use a computer-controlled isokinetic device found in
almost every commercial gym: the treadmill.
to apply key  with the eccentric exercises described in this chapter,
remember your goal is not to simply resist the movement of the belt but
instead to attempt to perform a concentric movement even though your arm is
being forced in the opposite direction by the movement of the treadmill belt.
this known as a forced eccentric movement, or overwhelming eccentric
movement, and its going to be a strange feeling at first. applying this concept
not only helps us to think differently about resistance, but the exercises serve
as powerful, untapped stimuli for adaptation.
application essentials
there are four reasons why youll love this type of resistance. the first two
results are physical in nature (microtargeted growth and fast gains), but the
others can be described as experiential and mind blowing (rewiring your
brain and a paradigm shift).
microtargeted growth
the eccentric portion of a rep is where much of the growth-stimulating micro
damage happens to muscle, during each exercise. this has been limited by
your concentric movements and gravity-based loads, but forced eccentric
movements allow you to tap into your organic eccentric strength for a more
powerful growth stimulus.
fast gains
strength increases with forced eccentric training happen faster than you might
expect. this is similar to the way in which concentric strength gains often come
very quickly when someone first begins strength training. rapid adaptation
happens because your brain and nervous system are learning how to better
communicate with your muscles. although youve probably been through this
with traditional concentric-constrained training, that type of neural strength
adaptation still hasnt happened with eccentric contractions. as a result, you
will quickly become stronger, and these reps will be more comfortable and come
to feel more locked in. this means that even if you have decades of training
experience, youll quickly get stronger as your body adapts to this brand-new
stimulus.
rewiring your brain
right now our brain and muscles really only understand gravity-based
resistance, so the idea of a different type of resistance would mean swapping
a dumbbell for a kettlebell (both of which are nearly identical gravity-based
loads). in contrast, applying isokinetic and forced eccentric exercises helps
to expand the breadth of our ability to produce force against different types
of resistancewhich you may not have known to exist, until now! this
breadth extends to the fact that these exercises apply forces that adapt
to you throughout the rep. these actionreaction forces (which you may
remember hearing about in physics class) put them in another subgroup of
accommodating resistance, called force-accommodating (also known as
[aka] tonically accommodating). this means that the force of the resistance
(exerted against you) changes based on the amount of force youre exerting.
these changes happen instantly, in real time, during every rep. training
doesnt get any more personalized than this.
paradigm shift
the use of isokinetic and force-accommodating resistance via a treadmill
induces a fundamental paradigm shift for the way in which we perceive the
stimulation adaptation of muscle and applied resistance. stated differently,
it helps us to think differently about how to get bigger gains. sure, well
always need to perform consecutive reps of concentric-constrained gravity-
based loads, but we dont need to limit ourselves to this anymore. we may
sidebarr
force-accommodating resistance also happens every time you
sit down and with every step you take. the more force you exert, the
harder the ground pushes back.
not have known that these limits existed, but just reading about this type
of novel application shatters the barriers that have been imposed by our
primitive iron age tradition. the destination? optimized and personalized
adaptationwhether its getting bigger, faster, stronger, or leaner; or going
longer. this shift in thinking all comes down to how you can achieve the
best results for you.
summary of benefits
 microtargeted growth
 rapid strength increases
 increased breadth of force production
 advanced awareness of how to produce force and stimulate muscle
advanced accommodating application
isokinetic resistance training can be used to optimize yet another type of
accommodating resistance, which is called kinetically accommodating
resistance. this means that your ability to exert force (aka strength, aka
force potential) changes as a result of the speed of contraction. the faster
you are forced eccentrically, the more force you can produce. in fact, fast
eccentrics offer your greatest ability to produce force and subsequent stimulus
for growth. unfortunately, once again, gravity prevents us from ever taking
advantage of this, because the only to move faster during the negative portion
of a lift is to exert less force.
for example, imagine that youre performing a barbell bench press and
want to perform a fast negative. after reaching full lockout, how do you get
the bar down quickly? you have to exert minimal eccentric force, essentially
letting the bar drop. although many people train this way naturally, hoping
that the recoil of their rib cage will give them a boost on the next concentric,
this common cheat does not tap into your maximal force potential. to actually
take advantage of your maximal strength (i.e., fast eccentric strength), you
have to use kinetically accommodating resistance (i.e., isokinetic resistance).
this is the greatest amount of force that human beings can generate,
although few people actually do so. you have this maximal strength
potential right now. you simply need the right type of resistance to tap
into it.
it is unlikely that youve ever experienced the magnitude of force output
that youre capable of achieving with slow eccentric overload, but fast eccentric
movements increase this force output to an even greater extent. for this reason,
applying the speed component to eccentric training is an advanced training
stimulus that should be applied only after developing mastery over slow forced
eccentrics. when you can consistently attempt to contract concentrically
during an eccentric overload, the kinetic variable be introduced. a common
error, called premature acceleration, happens when you introduce speed too
soon. the result is that youll never learn how to contract maximally against
an overwhelming force, and youll miss out on the growth potential. remember
that when it comes to forced eccentrics, practice makes powerful!
types of accommodation
 accommodating resistance. a resistance that changes based on
external factors.
 spatially accommodating. change with distance of movement (e.g.,
elastic bands and chains).
 force accommodating. change with the amount of force you apply
(e.g., isokinetic resistance).
 kinetically accommodating. change with speed and your subsequent
force application (e.g., isokinetic resistance).
ttrreeaaddmmiillll pprreessss
the movement of the treadmill press is similar to the eccentric portion of
a one-arm dumbbell press, using the isokinetic movement of the treadmill
belt as resistance.
setup
 while standing on the treadmill, set it to one mile per hour (. km/hr) or
slower and carefully step off without changing direction (as though you
were running on the belt), and set up in quadruped stance (i.e., on your
hands and knees). place the hand of your working arm on the moving
belt toward the head end of the treadmill (where the control panel is) (a).
 your other hand can serve as support on the side of the treadmill, safely
away from the moving belt.
execution
 begin with your shoulder flexed and your elbow at maximal extension
(i.e., the top of the rom), just as in the top of a shoulder press.
 as you push the palm of your open hand into the belt, try to concentri-
cally flex the shoulder and extend the elbow (b).
 your hand and arm will be forced backward, replicating an eccentric
portion of a one-arm shoulder press.
 when the desired rom is complete, simply lift your hand from the belt.
 rest as long as necessary to perform the next rep with full focus, and
then repeat.
coaching tips
 as you perform forced eccentric reps, your nervous system will quickly
fall back into the habit of passively resisting the movement, as opposed
to trying to move concentrically. this habit has likely been ingrained
in you after thousands of reps, so dont worry about it; its just going to
happen. whats important is that you become aware of it and adapt your
behavior. when you regain awareness that youre being passive, switch
your focus back to the intent of actively performing a concentric move-
ment, and youll immediately feel the difference.
 use a spotter who can stop the belt if necessary.
 nothing other than your flat palm should even come close to the belt.
all jewelry should be removed, and loose clothing should be tucked or
removed.
 start to incorporate these exercises with a very slow movement on the
belt. if your full rom rep duration is less than one second, the belt is
moving too quickly. to get the feel of contraction and to rewire your
nervous system, the belt needs to be moving slowly for the first several
weeks.
 to decrease the risk of excessive soreness, use a partial rom starting with
the shortest muscle length (this is always the default starting position
and is described for each exercise). as you become more experienced
you can increase to rom.
 one downside of this type of training is that it lacks an objective measure
of resistance and subsequent progress. this is why it becomes especially
important for you to understand that as your strength progressively
increases each week, and you apply this strength during each rep, the
resistance applied by the belt will also increase. so as long as youre put-
ting in the effort, your strength will continually grow, even if you cant
directly observe it via a numerical value (e.g., throwing another plate
onto the bar). the good news is that you will be able to see the resulting
hypertrophy and strength gains across other exercises.
 avoid the temptation to use progressive weekly increases in treadmill
speed as a desperate surrogate for numerical improvement. this pre-
mature acceleration happens because weve been conditioned to associ-
ate the feeling of progression with the act of increasing a number on a
machine (or on a barbell, etc.). break this conditioning by maintaining
focus on stimulating your muscle on every rep. this allows you to rely on
your own effort for weekly progression, which personalizes your training
even further.
a b
ttrreeaaddmmiillll rrooww
this exercise uses the opposite movement of the triceps press, so you set up
in quadruped stance beside the treadmill facing toward the back end.
setup
 begin with your elbow flexed and arm at your side, as though you have
just completed the concentric phase of a cable pull-down.
 your support hand will brace on the side of the treadmill, safely away
from the moving belt (a).
execution
 create isometric tension in your arm and back and press your hand into
the moving belt.
 attempt to actively contract concentrically as your arm is pulled eccen-
trically (b).
coaching tip
among the elements that make this exercise unique is the fact that you are
pushing your hand into the belt while trying to row (adduct) your elbow to
your side. this is employed as a back exercise, but youre also going to feel it
in your triceps. recall that the long head of the triceps crosses the shoulder,
and its actions include elbow extension and shoulder extension. because the
opposite of both of these actions is imposed by the treadmill row, the move-
ment acts as a double eccentric movement, which activates the long head in
a way that no other exercise can.
 massive, muscular arms nontraditional exercises 
a
b
bbaarrrr ffllyy
in chapter , we dissected the traditional dumbbell pec fly and uncovered its
many weaknesses. because the shoulder adduction movement is fundamental
to chest development and should be a good fit with anatomically targeted
training, ive been eager to find an alternative. by sheer coincidence, perform-
ing the movement with isokinetic treadmill resistance seems to solve every
problem created by the old exercise. moreover, the newer version seems to
go further, by optimizing the movement in every category (see table .).
collectively, the take-home message isnt to vilify db flys or shamelessly
promote barr flys. the key here lies in the difference between simply fol-
lowing iron age tradition, versus optimization through analysis, insight, and
innovation.
table . comparing dumbbell pectoralis flys and barr flys
db fl y barr fl y
rom limited full
force delta extreme optimal
stimuli rom of load stimulus % optimal
force accommodating paradoxical optimal
kinetically accommodating paradoxical optimal
db fl y barr fl y
scapular mobility pinned free
safety joint-vulnerable loading maximal organic
muscle-vulnerable loading maximal organic
momentum at vulnerable rom yes none
sidebarr
im not sure which of the following i like best about the name barr fly:
 the intentionally absurd eponymous nature;
 the homonym that conjures images of cliff and norm from the
1980s tv show cheers;
 that the exercise is somewhat antithetical to barbell training,
despite the implication that it uses a bar; or
 the fact that when you say it quickly it sounds like barf lies.
a
setup
 stand beside the treadmill facing the belt and assume a quadruped
position.
 use your non working arm to support your body weight on the side of
the treadmill.
 if you are using your left arm as the working limb (for example), the belt
should be moving from right to left in front of you.
 with your torso nearly parallel to the belt, adduct your shoulder to bring
your arm across the body, while maintaining a stable shoulder position.
if you were to look down at your arm in this position, you will likely see
it form approximately a -degree angle with your chest. although you
might achieve greater adduction by popping your shoulder forward, this
would be an unstable and potentially unsafe position. allow your stable
shoulder position to naturally dictate the starting position of the exercise.
execution
 with your elbow fully extended and shoulder adducted, press your hand
into the center of the belt (a).
 attempt to actively adduct the arm, as the belt forces you eccentrically
into abduction (b).
coaching tips
 maintain an extended elbow throughout.
 although you might not actually feel it, be aware that youre producing
a huge amount of force during this movement.
 this requires a surprising amount of core strength to maintain stability
and resist rotation. even though it is isometric for these muscles, youll
probably feel your core the next day.
a b
fflleexxyy ttrraaiinniinngg
one of the best ways to ensure maximal long-term arm development is
through strengthening your shoulder stabilizers. using bands to support a
hanging load, or bars that are designed to flex and bend, such as a bamboo
bar, are fun ways to accomplish this while exposing your muscles to a new,
contractile stimulus.
equipment
barbell, bands, and weight plates (alternative: bamboo bar)
setup
 loop one band through a light plate and repeat with a second band and
second plate.
 secure the bands to opposite ends of the bar so that the load is balanced
(one plate per side).
execution
as the bar moves throughout any exercise the plates will shift and bounce
while hanging in the bands, the force of which is amplified by the bar.
coaching tips
 for the sake of novelty you can experiment with this strategy on any
barbell exercise, including isolated biceps and triceps movements.
 for its intended purpose of developing shoulder stability and for long-
term physique development, its best to start with a compound exercise
like the bench press.
variation
performing the bench press with a flexy bar is just as described with a
standard bar in chapter , ensuring that you have a spotter. this is a perfect
opportunity to use the checklist and practice your technique. the load should
feel very light, because youre stimulating the shoulder stabilizersnot trying
to fatigue your triceps or pectoralis muscles (see the image on the next page).
panda training
because we use light weight for this movement, it can be hard to
know when to terminate the set. you may only come to notice creep-
ing fatigue when it begins to induce a strange horizontal oscillation
of the bamboo bar. when this fatigue happens, the bar will shift
back and forth, toward your head, then toward your waist, and then
back toward the head. this is caused by the progressive fatigue of
the shoulder stabilizers allowing the flex of the bar and elastic force
of the bands to take over (this devolution morphs the exercise into
panda training). the amplitude of this oscillation increases with
each fatigued rep, which can result in your losing control of the bar
(aka dumping). if you dump toward your face, youre eating bamboo.
if you dump toward your waist, you cant reproduce. dont be a panda!
sled training
this implement can be any load that provides resistance while you pull or
push it across the ground. one application is to perform prolonged physical
activity against a heavy resistance for cardio or general physical preparation.
alternatively, sleds are used for recovery work because of the concentric-only
nature of their movement (see figure .). well discuss this specific application
in a little more detail with three-phase feeder workouts in chapter , recovery.
when used for recovery workouts, sled movements are optimized by using
longer duration contractions and low concentric tension. one goal is to
locally increase blood flow to the working muscle without inducing further
mechanical stress. for this reason, sleds are a natural fit because the damage-
inducing eccentric portion of the movement is eliminated. also, contractions
performed with a one- to two-second concentric movement and a one- to
two-second isometric hold at the peak offer a consistent, prolonged tension
and brief occlusion of blood flow that will subsequently increase nutrient
delivery. this point was really hammered home for me when discussing sled
work with elite powerlifter and performance coach, tasha wolf whelan,
who said isometrics are a hugely underutilized component of arm training.
they are great for increasing metabolic demand and can help to facilitate
recovery adaptation (tasha whelan, pers. comm.).
some people have described the desired contractions to be performed with
sled-based movements as fast, as though you are trying to accelerate the
sled (aka grip and rip). although it is not generally incorrect, this suggestion
directly contradicts our specific goals of recovery adaptation for two reasons.
figure . a sled with wheels.
 it places a huge amount of tension on the working muscle at the most
stretched position, which is where it is most susceptible to muscle damage.
this damage is part of the stress we want during normal training but
not during a recovery session.
 secondly, the momentum results in the near elimination of tension
throughout the rest of the rom. if youre trying to get a pump, brief
tension isnt the best tool for the job.
when choosing your exercises, consider performing similar movements
to those that you executed during your last lift. this will help to mimic the
muscle fiber recruitment and facilitate their recovery adaptation.
attach a long connector such as a suspension trainer to a weighted sled and
grab the handles of the connector. with tension on the connector, anchor your
lower body and perform the upper body movement against the resistance of
the sled, which will be dragged toward you. for the next rep, you walk away
from the sled to reestablish tension and repeat.
cchheesstt pprreessss
the chest press is one of the most common movements performed during
sled work.
setup
face away from the sled, use a staggered stance for stability (a).
execution
perform a triceps-focused press (b).
coaching tip
the additional pump in your shoulders and chest can be seen as a bonus.
a
b
lloocckk aanndd wwaallkk
if you have a relatively weak lockout or performed end-rom work during your
last session, you can use the lock and walk technique.
setup
face away from the sled and perform a chest press to take any slack out of
the connector (a).
execution
walk forward with the sled behind you and maintain the lockout position (b).
coaching tip
the goal is to maintain steady tension on your extended triceps by walking
at a consistent pace.
a
b
ttrriicceeppss eexxtteennssiioonn vvaarriiaattiioonnss
these movements can be performed with either anterior or neutral shoulder
position variations, which changes with the setup phase based on position.
the execution phase is the same for both.
aanntteerriioorr sshhoouullddeerr ppoossiittiioonn
setup
face away from the sled with your elbows flexed and your shoulders flexed
so that your elbows are slightly higher than your shoulders (i.e., arms above
parallel to the ground) (a).
execution
extend the elbows by squeezing the triceps against the resistance of the
sled (b).
a
b
nneeuuttrraall sshhoouullddeerr ppoossiittiioonn
setup
 face the sled and push your hips back to bend at the waist so that your
chest is facing the ground.
 grip the connector handles with your arms at your sides and elbows
fully flexed (c).
execution
extend the elbows by squeezing the triceps against the resistance of the
sled (d).
coaching tip
some shoulder movement is inevitable.
c
d
sslleedd ccuurrll vvaarriiaattiioonnss
biceps movements involve relatively short rom but can be per-
formed with any of the three shoulder positions.
ffrroonnttaall ppoossiittiioonn
setup
for the frontal shoulder position, face the sled and hold the connector with
your arms roughly parallel to the ground (a).
execution
maintain the starting shoulder position and flex your elbows to pull the sled
toward you (b).
a
b
nneeuuttrraall aanndd ppoosstteerriioorr ppoossiittiioonnss
setup
 for the neutral and posterior shoulder positions, face away from the sled
and hold the connector at or slightly behind your hips (a).
 use a staggered stance for stability.
execution
flex your elbows by squeezing your arm musculature (b).
coaching tip
for the neutral shoulder position, you may be able to use the shoulder lock
technique, which can help mitigate shoulder fatigue.
a
b
traditional exercises performed
nontraditionally
rrooppee cclliimmbb aanndd sslleedd vvaarriiaattiioonn
like a pommel horse, high suspended ropes were an old-school physical cul-
ture implement that used to be standard issue in gyms everywhere. if your
facility doesnt have a rope attached to the ceiling, you may have access to a
machine designed to let you replicate rope climbing. although the exercise
starts off concentrically only, it could become eccentric-only on the descent,
if you allow it. for this to occur, rather than using your legs to assist on the
way down, slowly lower yourself by squeezing as much of your arm muscu-
lature as you can.
the ascent of traditional rope climbs can also have its difficulty increased
by using your arms only to climb, while bringing your knees up to hip level
and holding throughout.
this arm-centric movement can be replicated using a sled, which allows
you greater concentric control over the load and subsequent difficulty. face
the sled, bend (i.e., push your hips back so your chest faces the ground), and
use the connector as a rope (a) that you pull hand over hand, just as you
would in a climb. the connector will likely be short enough that youll have
to step back after a pull from each hand (b).
 massive, muscular arms nontraditional exercises 
a
b
oovveerrhheeaadd ttrriicceeppss wwaallkk
equipment
 high suspended rope or barbell
 squat rack
setup
 this movement involves progressively walking your body downward along
the length of a rope or slanted barbell, hand over hand (as though you
are shimmying along a pipe), while also performing small elbow flexion
and extension movements. the starting position is similar to that of an
overhead triceps extension, but rather than a cable attachment, youre
gripping a static overhead rope or barbell.
 the rope setup requires only an overhead attachment (a), but the more
complicated barbell setup warrants greater detail. place one safety bar
in the rack just below chest height and the other at roughly the height of
your lower abs. place the barbell in the rack on the uneven safety bars, so
that it is angled downward. the barbell should be secured by the notch
created from the inside of its bushing (aka the knobby thing) and terminus
of the grip area on the higher safety bar (b). stand inside the rack facing
toward the lower end of the barbell and ensure that it is secure.
 push your hips back to bend at the waist so that your torso is nearly
parallel to the ground directly under the barbell. grip the now overhead
barbell with a neutral grip. youll want your hands touching each other, so
that the pinky side of your closest hand is up against the index finger and
thumb of your farther hand. some of your weight will now be supported
by the barbell overhead, and your arms should be covering your ears.
execution
 the movement begins by walking one hand down the implement away
from you so that it grips the implement just on the other side of your other
hand.
 as each hand alternately travels down the implement, perform a slight
elbow flexion and extension by rocking your body forward and backward,
respectively.
coaching tips
 you can set the safety bars at any height difference, although starting
with a smaller difference is preferred to make this challenging exercise
more manageable.
 the rope offers a greater challenge because of its mobility. the more
vertical your starting body position, the easier the exercise will be.
 you can walk as far down the bar (or rope) as you prefer, and back up
if youd like. as with every eccentric-heavy exercise, it is recommended
that you start with low volume and adjust based on the extent of the
resulting delayed-onset muscle soreness.
a
b
rriiccee bbuucckkeett cchhaalllleennggee
a staple of grapplers and climbers around the world, manipulating your hands
in a bucket of uncooked rice can be a fun way to improve your forearms
size and your grip strength. fill any bucket with rice. larger buckets (e.g.,
five-gallon) will allow you to use both arms at once if you prefer. the work-
ing hand should dive into the rice with fingers extended. once buried, you
can perform concentric movements of the hand, wrist, and shoulder against
the resistance of the rice. an example is to perform a crush by gripping the
rice as you would a bar, followed by opening your hand and spreading your
fingers. note that because this is concentric only, you may feel a burn from
the working muscles but are unlikely to incur delayed-onset muscle soreness.
coaching tips
 the deeper your hands are buried, the greater the resistance.
 sand can be used as an alternative to rice but is more likely to cause a
muddy mess as you perspire.
 dry your hands and arms before plunging them into the rice to minimize
sticking (and the subsequent mess when you remove them).
 keep a lid on the bucket when not in use to prevent general contamination.
 have a broom and dustpan nearby. you will need them.
wrap-up
its likely that after reading this chapter, your training will never be the same.
youve seen how to tap into a level of strength that few humans will ever do.
the resulting stimulation of muscle growth and strength gain will reflect
that accomplishment. better yet, youve seen how to expand your breadth
of force generation and escape beyond the limits of gravity. along with this
comes a fundamental upgrade of the neural software, advancing your very
understanding of resistance training. collectively, the means to accomplish
these feats may seem unusual at first, but by applying them, youll come to
see that youre simply ahead of the crowd.
rreeccoovveerryy
ooppttiimmiizzaattiioonn
if youve tried to learn about recovery from fitness-related media, you may
have found the information seems limited to only the following tropes:
glycogen restoration, hydration, and sleep cycles. these ideas were great, but
they predate the existence of texting. as always, well fill that information
vacuum with meaty goodness that you can apply to your physique right away.
lets begin the upgrade with a statement that evokes such a strong
emotional reaction that i can only refer to it as the shocker. you dont want
recovery. its controversial enough that i may find myself the target of nerd
rage on social media, but consider the statement in the context of these three
common scenarios and their solutions.
 if youre training to maintain muscle size rather than increase it, then you
may be concerned with accelerating recovery. but remember that recov-
ery is merely a return to baseline (but not going beyond), which is not
your goal. you want growth. solution: upgrade your recovery adaptation.
 if your recovery adaptation is impaired due to excessive training volume
or frequency, this will likely manifest as general fatigue or burnout, rather
than muscle soreness (for example). these are not muscle-based issues,
nor can they be fixed with traditional recovery interventions. solution:
fix your training.
 if your recovery adaptation is impaired due to basic lifestyle factors, such
as chronically inadequate sleep or nutritional deficiencies, your solution
lies outside of training. again, these issues will not be fixed by slapping
a commonly touted recovery technique onto your program. solution: fix
your lifestyle.
the exception to these reasons comes with the muscle soreness that
accompanies the eccentric overload training (used to optimize structural
growth). although youll probably come to love a bit of post-eccentric, delayed-
onset muscle soreness (doms), it should not be excessive or chronic. although
the techniques described in this chapter may help, youll see how to keep
doms manageable via personalization in upcoming chapters.
in order to accelerate your arm development, ill reveal some of my own
lab-based research experiences along with how to use the surprising results
for improved recovery adaptation. well cover easy-to apply interventions to
help get you started today and destroy a couple of zombie myths (i.e., those
that refuse to die, not myths about zombies) along the way.
its important to remember the selye recovery adaptation curve (from
chapter ) and the cautionary tale of using blue shifting techniques in an
attempt to accelerate recovery. with that in mind, well explore interventions
that facilitate the bodys organic recovery or adaptation response, rather
than trying to blunt it. to differentiate them from traditional destructive
recovery methods, those presented here are called adaptive recovery (aka
progressive recovery) techniques. so rather than blindly chasing recovery,
well use what we learned about adaptive targeting (key ) and precision
microtargeting (key ) in order to maximize your arm development.
sympathetic shifting
the body has two primary systems to consider for recovery adaptation,
and like a physiological sniper, well optimize our effectiveness by targeting
interventions for each. muscle is the most obvious target, but we cant neglect
the most integrated system of all, the nervous system (aka the central
nervous system [cns]). you can think of it as the bodys internal wiring
that causes muscle to contract, but its even more important than that because
its related to our mood, as well as our levels of energy and stress.
one practical example of this is the preworkout activation phase (from
chapter ) that gets the sympathetic nervous system (aka fight or flight)
going to facilitate an intense workout. if we stay in this mode for too long,
which can happen with chronic stress and inadequate recovery, well enter a
physiological state of overtraining. this dreaded state results in a prolonged
fatigue and mood disturbance that should be avoided like that guy at your
gym who asks for a spot but then makes you do all the work.
so, while sympathetic activation is great for a short period of time, we want
to balance that stimulation with a more relaxed alertness by shifting toward
the parasympathetic (aka rest and digest) side of the spectrum after the
lift. the problem with this sympathetic shifting is that the emotional stresses
of everyday life push us into being chronically stimulated, anxious, or just
stressed out. when we live on the sympathetic side of the spectrum, were
always in overdrive, and it becomes harder to find anything left to activate
for a workout. it also means that we have chronically high levels of the stress
hormone cortisol, which can increase muscle breakdown muscle and suppress
immune response. the worst-case scenario happens when we exceed our
limits for too long, and our engine burns out. this is overtraining, and when
it happens it can be hard to get out of bed, let alone get up for a workout.
this is the basis for the popular book why zebras dont get ulcers.
we want to be more like zebras, who remain ulcer free because they dont
experience the chronic stresses that we primates do. further, by maintaining
a baseline chill attitude, they are able turn on their cns (i.e., activate it)
immediately when they need to perform (e.g., escape from a hungry lion). if
we extrapolate these ideas to ourselves, sympathetic shifting could lead to
more effective workouts, but more importantly a happier, healthier life.
the nasa recovery plan
the first clues for this recovery technique came from my national aeronautics
and space administration research experience at the johnson space center,
which investigated the connections between muscle and the nervous system.
for our purposes, it pertained to the use of sensory input in an attempt to
decrease muscle loss, which is critical for long-duration spaceflight (i.e., going
to mars and beyond).
it turns out that something as simple as touch provides enough sensory
input to the nervous system that it affects other tissues, like muscle. in our
case, chronic touch of the foot provided enough stimulation that muscle mass
was maintained, even during simulated microgravity. this means that even
though the muscle itself had no direct stimulation (which would normally
cause it to shrivel like a punctured balloon), the nervous system was able to
step in and disrupt the accelerated muscle breakdown.
we can use this idea by removing sensory input for brief periods of time
after a workout to decrease the load on the nervous system and restore a calm
alert state. when you combine this with controlled diaphragmatic breathing
(aka belly breathing), your body shifts from a sympathetic to parasympathetic
end of the spectrum, which is what were after.
once again, credit goes to dr. john rusin for putting this science together
and turning it into a practical postworkout recovery technique. this is one
of the most impactful recovery techniques ive experienced over the years,
and if youre finding yourself in a highly stressed state (which happens to all
of us at some point), youll feel the difference immediately.
method
 once your heart rate has decreased below about  beats per minute,
remove your shoes, lie on your back and elevate your calves on a bench.
your hips and knees will be flexed at  degrees and your feet will be
off the bench.
 close your eyes and turn your palms up to remove as much sensory
stimulation as possibleespecially from the sensitive areas of the palms
of your hands and feet.
 this is where diaphragmatic breathing comes into play, not for bracing,
but for shifting from a sympathetic to a parasympathetic state. although
your breathing will start off at a faster pace, youll want to work toward
slowing your breath to  breaths per minute. its not important that you
actually reach this number, but it helps to guide the duration of each
inhalation and exhalation.
 inhale through the nose and exhale through the mouth with pursed lips
to help you to slow your breath and shift toward a calm alert state.
 maintain a positive attitude for the duration. remember that the nervous
system affects all, so think about the accomplishment of your workout
and how great youre going to feel by applying this technique.
bonus
 research in trained athletes has shown that this breathing practice com-
bined with positive reflection (e.g., feeling great about your workout) and
focus on the benefits of the program is an effective tool for cns control
and stress management (dziembowska et al. ).
 in addition to helping with the stresses of everyday life, this will help to
optimize training performance and to reduce the risk of overtraining.
cns recovery
another neural intervention relates to something that everyone needssleep.
this is the time when your cns recovers from the stresses of the day and
bakes in what youve learned during the waking period. unfortunately,
its so commonly disrupted that an entire industry has grown out of the
consequences. if youre missing out on sleep, then your arm development and
probably every aspect of your life is going to be compromised.
whether its due to an authors ability to reach beyond the pages, or just
their terrible writing, youll often find that reading about sleep can be a
great cure for insomnia. for the sake of brevity well break it down to three
actionable tips that my clients and i love, in order to help you get the sleep
you need to adapt and perform optimally.
blue blockers
one of the most common sleep disruptors comes from blue-wavelength light,
which destroys the natural sleep hormone melatonineffectively telling our
brain to wake up. unfortunately, this is the main wavelength is that is emitted
from the screens of electronic devices, including phones, laptops, and tvs.
trying to avoid all of these sources is a bit like trying to stop breathing, so
well take the more practical approach. wearing a cheap pair of orange tinted
(nonprescription) glasses will help to filter out these wavelengths, as well as
other ambient sources of light. as a throwback to the connection between light
waves and recovery interventions discussed in chapter , you might think of
this technique as orange shifting. throw the glasses on for  to  minutes
before your sleep time to maintain natural sleep-inducing melatonin levels.
the interventions presented in this chapter are all low-hanging fruit, but
realistically not every single intervention is feasible for every person. in spite
of that, putting on glasses before sleep is just about the easiest and least time
consuming thing that you could do to improve your physique and performance.
if you find yourself resistant to this practice in spite of the simplicity, it may
be time to reevaluate.
conditioning
another simple technique is to develop a bedtime routine that will condition
your body to prepare for rest. an example of this psychological conditioning
is to consume your presleep meal followed by brushing, flossing, etc., then
watching tv for  minutes before lights out. as a double win, i can tell
you from five years of experience that donning orange glasses an hour or so
before bed is a great environmental cue to shut down. once the world turns
orange to me, the unwinding process begins.
belly breathing
this is another excellent time to engage diaphragmatic breathing and the
parasympathetic nervous system. its a little different than your postworkout
period during which youre trying to shift away from a highly stimulated
sympathetic period of the lift. before sleep, you should already be in a more
parasympathetic state, with sensory deprivation coming in the form of
darkness and quiet (or white noise). for this reason, it is more important to be
as comfortable as possible (typically in your bed) and focus on diaphragmatic
breathing.
making sleep anabolic
a sleep-related fix that improves muscle growth from the nutritional side
is related to one of the most common myths that refuses to die: sleep is
your most anabolic time. in this case, anabolic refers specifically to the
process of building muscle (the antonym is catabolic, the process of muscle
breakdown). although i believed this nocturnal anabolism myth for several
years, my research experience once again helped to upgrade my thinking
and subsequent application.
the idea was put to the test in a highly controlled lab setting called a general
clinical research center (gcrc). in my case, this research center was a wing
of a hospital manned by specially trained nurses and medical staff who were
able to tightly control the environmental conditions, including nutrient intake,
of our subjects. because we were studying protein intake and muscle protein
synthesis (the growth, recovery, and adaptation response), we needed strict
enforcement of dietary restrictions. the actual studies always began very early
in the morning, so our subjects would spend the preceding night sleeping
under the watchful eye of the gcrc staff (to ensure dietary compliance).
after an overnight fast, wed begin the morning study by playing the role
of vampire and carefully extracting blood from the subjects arteries. from
this we could look at their levels of muscle anabolism, and without fail, the
subjects were always in a state of muscle breakdownin direct contrast to
the anabolic myth.
the reason for the contradiction is simple: recovery and adaptation require
both caloric energy and protein. when were sleeping, we have neither. worse
yet, our vital functions still require these elements during this fasting time
and readily break down our de facto store of protein (i.e., muscle) to meet
their needs.
its important to note that the sleep-is-anabolic myth in not simply incorrect,
but its the exact opposite of realityour nightly sleep-induced fast is actually
catabolic. so, by fixing this protein-fasted state, were not only stopping the
muscle breakdown, but were fueling the muscle growth to actually make
sleep anabolic. thats a double win that you can experience every single night.
one simple action is to consume a slowly digesting protein like milk-derived
casein. this protein clots in the stomach and is slowly digested to provide a
steady trickle of amino acids to the body. this will allow both your muscles
and other tissues to be consistently fed throughout the night. not only has
this been shown to decrease muscle catabolism, but it turns your body into a
-hour anabolic machine (trommelen and van loon ). ingest  grams
of slow protein before sleep if you are a lean -pound ( kg) individual or
roughly 1g protein for every  pounds (. kg) of body weight. specific timing
isnt important, but the general idea is to consume the protein shortly before
you retire as long as it doesnt disrupt sleep.
casein powder is the easiest because the dose is precise, with minimal
contribution of other calorie sources (fats and carbs). it is also the primary
source that has been studied for this purpose. alternatively, protein sources
like lean red meats or whole eggs should suffice, but you will need to be
aware of the caloric contribution of fats in these sources and adjust your
daily intake accordingly.
protein pulse feeding
another important recovery intervention was discovered in the gcrc after
the subjects consumed their first protein-containing meal of the day. even
if the subjects had never worked out a day in their lives, morning protein
ingestion always caused a small activation of muscle growth. this anabolic
effect is referred to as a nutraceutical effect, which is a direct biochemical
change induced by a food or nutrient (shimomura et al. ). in this case,
its the stimulation of muscle protein synthesis that you can take advantage
of for growth, recovery, and adaptation.
to take advantage of this effect, one can consume a fast protein, which is
quickly broken down into its component building blocks, called amino acids. i
would suggest ingesting  grams of whey protein or  gram of protein for every
 pounds (. kg) of body weight when otherwise fasted. this can be repeated
every two and a half to three hours. these amino acids are then absorbed into
the bloodstream. an increase in the quantity of these amino acids in the blood
serves as a signal to the muscle that its being fed. this triggers the muscle to
give the go-ahead to start building more (muscle) protein. that nutraceutical
stimulation of muscle protein synthesis happens anytime amino acid levels in
the blood start off relatively low and then are pulsed to a relatively high level.
this protein pulse feeding means that once the amino acids (from ingested
whey, in this example) are cleared from your bloodstream, you can repeat the
process for another anabolic nutraceutical effect.
whey protein isolate is ideal for this task because it is a highly purified
form of this dairy-derived protein. whey protein concentrate is slightly less
pure and contains some remaining elements of the initial protein extraction
from dairy products, such as the sugar lactose. although both work well,
whey protein isolate is more expensive. a commercial blend of both types is
quite common and serves as an affordable compromise.
for an applied example, upon waking at  a.m., you consume  grams of
protein with a granola bar containing  grams of carbohydrates. at : a.m.,
you consume another drink containing  grams of protein with  grams
glucose as part of a feeder workout (see next section).
based on the successful combination of research experience and client
results, i initially published this applied theory in  (barr) and am excited
to have had it validated by independent research four years later (moore et
al. ).
active recovery feeder workouts
this triple threat recovery technique combines nutrition and training to
optimize your arm development, and it is going to be an incredibly rewarding
experience (and a great time for you to take selfies). it begins by upgrading
the following traditional theory for boosting recovery adaptation: increase
blood flow to the muscle, which is thought to clear away biochemical waste
and bring in more muscle-building nutrients (good stuff?). this appears to
be at least half right, because the right combination of nutrients can alone
stimulate blood flow, which conveniently facilitates their own delivery to
cells. this accelerated transport is a powerful nutraceutical effect that is just
waiting for another element to unlock its latent potential.
that element comes in the form of a specific type of exercise, and together,
this becomes a potent combination. although you cant isolate the increase
in blood flow to specific muscles with food alone, you can do so by using
feeder workouts. the result of combining the nutrient-stimulated blood
flow with that caused by exercise is a massive pump, increased feeling of
well-being, and accelerated recovery adaptation. we cap this system off with
the final synergistic component: cns recovery in the form of sympathetic
shifting. altogether the resulting protocol is referred to as a three-phase
feeder workout.
phase nutrition
the nutrition phase begins shortly before the workout (roughly - minutes
prior depending on whats ingested). the combination of fast carbs and protein
will stimulate blood flow, even before the exercise. each of their more specific
nutraceutical effects is mentioned in the list below.
how to. consume a fast protein like whey to increase blood flow, stimulate
muscle protein synthesis, and provide the amino acid building blocks to
the muscle for repair and growth.
example. consume  grams of whey protein or  gram protein for every 
pounds (. kg) of body weight.
how to. consume fast carbohydrates such as glucose or a sport drink to
increase blood flow and fuel the exercise.
example. consume  to  grams, or  gram of carbs for every  to  pounds
(.-. kg) of body weight.
phase contraction
the feeder workout is designed to further increase muscle blood flow (started
by phase ) and force-feed the muscle with the desired nutrients. this is
accomplished by using concentric and isometric-focused exercise, such as
sled training (discussed in chapter ). a powerful cue is to imagine that
this workoutnutrient combination is forcing the nutrients into every active
muscle cell as you perform each rep. sure, its not scientifically accurate, but
this cue really helps you to focus on squeezing during the concentric and
isometric contractions, even if no load is present.
the key to the contraction phase of the feeder workout is to create a
localized stimulation of blood flow but not cause further muscle damage or
otherwise impair recovery adaptation.
ideally this can be achieved through the use of bands or sled-based
movements. recall that sleds are used for recovery work because of the
concentric-only nature of their movement. this means no damaging eccentric
portion. the same can be said for bands when the eccentric portion is largely
ignored. the band resistance at the lengthened portion of the eccentric rep,
when more muscle microdamage can occur, is minimal. also, unlike gravity-
based loads, theres no momentum to worry about when allowing a fast
eccentric movement with a band. for elastic resistance, youre just making
sure that the band doesnt snap and hurt anyone. think of it more as guiding
the band back to its starting position rather than strictly controlling it. as
an example, triceps push-downs can be performed concentrically and held
isometrically, and then the band can be allowed to quickly return to starting
position.
biceps curls are a classic example of a feeder sled drag. with tension on
the connector, the biceps are squeezed to flex the elbow against the sled
resistance. the peak contraction is held for a moment, even after the sled has
stopped moving or providing tension. no eccentric movement is performed,
although you should win a prize if you can figure out how this would even
be possible. instead, the next rep is set up by returning your arms to the
starting position of the concentric portion and walking away from the sled
to create tension once again.
repeat two similar exercises per body part from your last workout for three
to four sets, each set lasting roughly  to  seconds, with  to  seconds
of rest in between. the simplified objective here is really just to get a huge
pump, so these parameters are offered as broad guidelines. as a result of this
freedom, these workouts can be a lot of fun and provide a great opportunity
for you to personalize according to your own preferences. remember that
the feeling here is to squeeze the muscle to force nutrients into your cells.
this is intended to feed your muscle, not cause further mechanical stress.
for sled-based exercises, hold the peak contraction for a two-count before
resetting for the next concentric part of the exercise.
one benefit of this low-intensity, low-duration exercise is that it allows you
to perform other fitness-related modalities, during the same session, such as
stretching and cardio. you can see examples of sled-based exercises to use
in a feeder workout in chapter , nontraditional exercises.
sidebarr
massage is commonly believed to facilitate recovery through increases
in muscle blood flow. there are several problems with this idea,
including the lack of definition for either massage (which is a broad
category of diverse physical manipulation techniques) or recovery.
interestingly, research has shown that various types of massage do not
increase muscle blood flow (tiidus ). in my experience, present-
ing this evidence-based statement is consistently met with a negative
emotional reaction, as though i am personally responsible for taking
away something that people love. to be clear, this doesnt mean that
your favorite type of massage isnt beneficial (because massages are
awesome!); it simply means that the underlying mechanism does not
seem to be blood flow related.
phase sympathetic shifting
with the contraction phase and any subsequent physical activity complete,
youre going to be left with an incredibly rewarding pump. even though youre
not intentionally activating your sympathetic nervous system as you would
for a standard lift, the ensuing sense of accomplishment makes the perfect
time to facilitate neural recovery. research shows that positive affirmation
is a part of this recovery process, which means that piggybacking onto the
great feeling you already have from the feeder workouts potentiates the effect.
speaking of positivity, dont forget to take selfies with your massive arm pump!
creatine monohydrate
wed be remiss if we didnt explore the most effective and widely studied
supplement on the planet, creatine monohydrate. i give credit to one of
my personal mentors, anthony almada, for having introduced it to north
america more than  years ago and letting me in on the secret that nothing
beats creatine for enhancing arm muscularity and strength.
what is it?
creatine is a source of quick energy that naturally exists in every cell in
the human body. we ingest it anytime we eat red meat, although youd have
to consume an excessive amount of beef to experience a performance- or
physique-related benefit. the good news is that we have the supplemental form
known as creatine monohydrate, which simply means that a water molecule
is attached to that of creatine. other types of creatine, which swap out the
water with other molecules, have not been shown to be more effective than
the inexpensive and widely studied monohydrate.
its worth emphasizing that this discussion is simply a science-based
overview for informational purposes and not a prescription or even a
recommendation. for more information, you may want to consult with a
licensed nutritionist who has either a sport specialization (such as a certified
specialist in sports dietetics) or an advanced degree (e.g., masters or doctorate
degree) in a biological science. these distinctions increase the likelihood that
the individual will be familiar with the ingredient or capable of translating
the research to application.
is it safe?
research has consistently shown creatine monohydrate supplementation
to be safe and effective in both healthy people and those in a variety of
disease states (kreider et al. ). some people experience temporary
gastrointestinal distress in the early days of creatine use. although this is a
short-lived phenomenon, it can often be avoided altogether by using smaller
doses throughout the day.
the other so-called side effect is incredibly misunderstood and actually a
big positive for us. it pertains to the fact that most of your cells are naturally
filled with water, and this is especially true for muscle cells. storing more
water inside makes muscles look and feel like real muscle, because thats
what real muscle is.
the level of muscle fullness can also be naturally manipulated by increasing
your carbohydrate intake, for example. if you consume higher quantities of
carbs for a short period of time (aka if you carb load), your muscles will store
them within muscle as glycogen, and a lot more water along with it. this
could actually create the appearance that youve quickly added an additional
pound or two of solid muscle.
the misunderstanding about muscle hydration also applies to creatine use
and the side effect referred to as water retention. people erroneously interpret
the concept of water retention as bloating or water stored under the skin (which
would look and feel like body fat). importantly, the overwhelming majority of
water storage accompanies creatine and glycogen inside of your muscle, which
youll quickly notice as fuller looking muscle (kreider et al. ).
storing more quick energy in the muscle (as creatine) helps to improve
different types of performance, including muscle strength. overall, this leads
to more impactful workouts, which result in greater long-term muscle growth.
better yet, the water storage causes a rapid visible increase in muscularity but
can also decrease the amount of natural muscle breakdown. the net result
is, once again, more muscle.
creatine is often dissolved in water and consumed at a dose of three to five
grams per day in single or divided doses. the initial week of creatine use may
consist of loading, during which the muscle levels rapidly increase. this
is accomplished using a total of  grams per day in divided doses. excess
creatine is simply excreted in urine, so theres no concern of overdose or more
sidebarr
rapid weight loss during calorie-restricted and low-carb diets is
caused by the excretion of this natural water storage in muscle, rather
than actual fat loss. anytime you consume insufficient carbohydrates,
your body will burn through your stored carbs for energy and release
the water along with it (ultimately excreted as urine).
this water loss is seen as rapid decreases in scale weight, but once
theres no more glycogen and water to get rid of (usually in - days),
the needle on the scale abruptly stops moving. note: this water and
glycogen storage also accounts for much of the initial weight rebound
when a short-term dieter resumes their normal caloric intake.
specific long-term dosing protocols. the best way to avoid gastrointestinal
distress is to begin with the lowest single dose of three grams and increase
according to preference and tolerance.
wrap-up
this chapter has been a huge information dump, so you may need to use these
very protocols to recover, starting right now. although it takes a little time
and practice to find how these techniques fit best into your lifestyle, youll
love the result. remember that this personalization allows you to optimize
your performance now but also allows you to adapt the techniques for years
to come. this relentless, never-ending upgrade has already started for you,
and this chapter in particular is intended to erase some of the outdated
dogma about recovery. by replacing the mythology with current practices
and a focus on adaptation, youre taking yet another giant leap ahead of the
crowd. so be sure to unwind and get some sleep tonight, because your cns
has a lot of adaptive rewiring to do.
part iii
tthhee pprrooggrraammss
this page intentionally left blank
ggyymm--bbaasseedd
pprrooggrraammmmiinngg
youve exercised monastic patience to get through a ton of concepts, theories,
and techniques, but now its time to put them to work for you. this chapter
incorporates the five key targets into a personalized training program that
helps you to achieve maximum arm development. what makes this application
even better is that instead of shoehorning the novel techniques into a
traditional program, well upgrade the approach to programming, just as we
did with everything else in this book. in order to do that, well first need to
undo some of the damage engrained by traditional thinking and start with
a clean slate. rather than just read more words about it, this is something
youll need to experience through a helpful training challenge.
targeted growth challenge
to help reinforce the importance of stimulation overload, well perform a
simple experiment. start with your favorite arm exercise and a load that youd
normally use for  to  reps. drop that load by  percent for this single-set
experiment. for example, if you normally use a -pound barbell for biceps
curls, use  pounds for the test. your goal is to perform a set with this lighter
load and reach failure at the same repetition goal in under a minute (so no
super slow reps). in this example, if you normally perform sets of eight reps
with the -pound barbell, you want to do the same using  pounds, ensuring
that by the end you couldnt perform another rep without cheating (i.e., you
have reached muscular failure).
test summary
 choose your favorite arm exercise.
 drop the - to -rep training load by  percent.
 perform a set to failure at the same rep goal (-), in less than one
minute.
you may be surprised how easy it is for you to achieve targeted failure,
even after dropping the weight by a massive  percent. in fact, you may not
even reach the rep goal before your form breaks down. either result is a big
win, because it shows the depth of recruitment you can tap into when muscle
stimulation becomes your focus, as opposed to simply throwing on (and then
throwing around) load. once youve experienced this breakthrough, you
might question the effectiveness of other heavy sets that youve done in the
past. this single example shows a fundamental problem with the chronic use
of prescriptive loads based on percent repetition maximum (percent rm),
which was introduced in chapter  (see consecutive contraction limit). the
load itself doesnt matter as much as how you use it to stimulate your muscle.
without overtly trying to do so, your success of this experiment is most
likely achieved through the following:
 slowing the reps down (probably closer to a ///, resulting in a higher
time under tension [tut])
 maintaining strict technique (more tension on the muscle throughout,
resulting in a higher tut)
 internally focusing on squeezing your muscle (greater muscle ineffi-
ciency)
altogether this offers a more pronounced and more thorough stimulation
of metabolic growth and possibly even structural growth. consider that
weve spent time discussing each of the stimulus techniques you used, but
you accomplished each of them organically by using only a single conceptual
cue: make the exercise harder.
this intuitive achievement means that your body already knows how to
do all of these things. the problem is that your body also wants to not do
these things. its up to you to override that primitive survival instinct and
optimally stimulate your muscle to grow. this is where your key performance
indicators (kpis) come into play.
programming kpis
one of the essential components of your optimized program is that it offers
personal feedback and evaluation. this empowers you to continually assess
how the plan is working and adjust accordingly. a generalized program may be
somewhat effective in  percent of people, but personal assessment is the
key to taking your results to the next level. well explore a few kpis that you
can use to evaluate your training stimuli and then make course corrections
along the way to deliver an experience thats custom tailored to you.
postworkout kpis happen after your workout and are subdivided into
short and long term. short-term kpis are used to evaluate the effect of your
preceding workout, so you can adjust for your next lift. long-term kpis
serve as a warning that your overall stress is too high, which could be due
to excessive training volume or intensity.
kpis that happen within the workout itself are referred to as intraworkout.
they provide combined feedback about your previous lift as well as how youre
performing on that day. as with postworkout kpis, the goal is to use this
information to refine your workout and achieve your biggest gains.
delayed-onset muscle soreness
the first short-term kpi consists of a relatively simple subjective evaluation
of your delayed-onset muscle soreness (doms) in the days following your lift.
muscle soreness is a result of the desirable microtrauma induced by the
workout, which then triggers the bodys immune system to start clearing away
the damaged tissue and make room for new muscle. its a bit like clearing
out the debris from a construction site before starting the new, upgraded
build. i appreciate that its hard to make the word trauma seem innocuous,
let alone desirable, even when prefaced with micro. but we can draw on the
lesson of the recovery adaptation curve (chapter ) to recognize that in this
case, microtrauma is part of the stress stimulus (phase ) that sets up the
preadaptation phase (phase ) for microtargeted structural growth (phase ).
thinking about this process as a connected chain of events also helps
to explain why the soreness is delayed; its a result of your bodys initial
identification of the damage, followed by a relatively slow immune and
inflammation reaction. so, its not the actual muscle damage that causes the
pain, its your bodys delayed reaction to that damage (and it has nothing to
do with lactic acid!).
when you experience greater doms than normal, its a good sign that youve
had a stronger training stimulus and are experiencing the proportionally
amplified phase  effect. we saw an example of this, represented as a red
shifted recovery adaptation curve in figure .. although the existence of
doms is a good sign that growth has been induced, its absence does not
suggest otherwise. there are two reasons for this, which also explain why
were not chasing soreness.
 the response is highly individualized (some people almost never get
sore).
 its more likely to occur after training with eccentric overload, for micro-
targeted structural growth. this means that lifting to target metabolic
hypertrophy is less likely to induce doms, which could make it harder
to use as a kpi for this type of training.
note that when you first use stimulation-focused training, youre likely to
experience doms even though youre using lighter loads. this is because
youre recruiting a greater proportion of your muscle fibers. any previously
untapped fibers will be unaccustomed to any training stimulus and will be
very sensitive to anything you throw at it.
distal early warning
when trying a new exercise, you want to watch out for excessive isolated
doms that happens in smaller muscles that you didnt even know existed. this
localized soreness means that you havent trained these muscles, so theyre
taking a disproportionately high amount of stress stimulus. that concept
was painfully hammered into me after a humbling (and hobbling) training
experience. at the time, my leg workouts consisted of squatting to parallel
with  pounds for sets of eight at a /// tempo (tut of  seconds),
lying leg curls, and heavy cable leg adductions with an ankle attachment.
this isnt intended as an attempt to impress, but to illustrate that my legs
were used to dealing with heavy loads. as a lark, i trained with a friend at the
local y and decided to try the seated leg adductor machine (also known as
[aka] the thigh squeezer, aka no machine). i had never used this ridiculous
machine before (i mean, why would i?), but i regularly trained this muscle
group, so it wasnt a big deal to experiment for a couple of sets with a load
that felt pretty light.
the result: in nearly three decades of lifting, i have never been that sore
(before or since). the doms, isolated to my upper, inner thighs, impaired my
ability to walk for four days. this happened because my usual cable adductor
training focused the load at the ankle, while the machine placed the load at
the knee. the resulting change in recruitment meant that muscles previously
used only for support were now doing all of the workand they got wrecked.
this was an incredible lesson about the specificity of anatomically targeted
training, as well as punishment from the training gods for my having scoffed
at an exercise.
you can apply this lesson to your own training, based on the experiences
of those who have used the programs herein. from this, be aware that youre
most likely to experience this type of isolated soreness in your core (which
is intentionally broad, but universally weak), your upper back (including
shoulders), or your forearms. whatever the case, if you experience a huge
amount of isolated doms, use it as both a caution flag and an opportunity
to better understand your body. regarding the former, if a muscle group is
bearing an unusually high amount of stress stimulus, it may be headed toward
injury if pushed further. for example, if the only thing you feel from a new
biceps exercise is an intense isolated forearm doms, you need to back off
the load and let that muscle catch up to the others.
this is also a potentially exciting find, because it encourages you to evaluate
your current training and figure out both what this isolated muscle is, and
why it hasnt been activated before. that experience-driven personalization is
one of the best ways to learn about your bodys specific response to training.
soreness is incredibly idiosyncratic, or widely variable between individuals,
which makes it a very personal kpi. some people rarely get sore while
others start limping at the sight of a barbell. the key to this assessment is
your relative sorenessare you more or less sore than you would be after a
moderately hard workout?
higher volume training, using greater loads, and especially eccentric-
overload training, can all increase the magnitude of doms. the amount
soreness you induce should progressively decrease as the muscle adapts
week after week, so keep this in mind and adjust your weekly expectations
of doms accordingly.
when you begin the program, youll evaluate your level of soreness over the
-hour following a lift. although this is a highly variable subjective measure,
during the first weeks of the program, youre looking for mild soreness and
stiffness, especially at stretched positions. you can use the following two
measurements as guides:
 if youre too sore, wait to train the same muscle group until a minimum
of  hours have passed after the soreness has dissipated.
 if youre not feeling anything, reassess your training intensity. if you
experience the same result and have evaluated the training parameters,
add one set to each arm exercise. as a last resort, you may need to
decrease the rep range and increase the load while maintaining rating
of perceived exertion (rpe).
localized muscle fatigue
localized muscle fatigue is expected during the workout but should not
be carried over from previous workouts. for example, your grip should not
be limiting your barbell biceps curls, and core fatigue should not be limiting
your goblet squat. how do you distinguish between localized muscle fatigue
and doms? an example of localized muscle fatigue might be the feeling of
jelly you get in your muscles toward the last set of a particularly grueling
workout. you might find yourself tempted to take a shortcut in your reps,
or loosen up your form, as a result of this feeling of weakness. by contrast,
doms often manifests itself the morning (or subsequent mornings) after a
particularly tough workout as a feeling of being rusted shut, accompanied
by soreness or even pain in the affected muscles.
due to the integrated nature of the human body, it is always important to
be aware of your fatigue level in muscles that are indirectly targeted, such
as shoulders, core, and those of the forearms and grip. this is useful both
during the workout and in the hours and days following a lift. if this local
muscle fatigue becomes limiting, adjust the program by reducing the volume
of the implicated exercises.
one example of localized muscle fatigue could be in how you adjust your
grip. if your grip becomes limiting, eliminate direct grip work and carries
for at least one workout, until the problem resolves. gradually reintroduce
these exercises by starting with loaded carries once per week and reassess.
as the simplest example of how to personalize your program based on kpi
feedback, you can use the following guides: if limiting, reduce volume. when
resolved, gradually reintroduce volume.
systemic fatigue
systemic fatigue is a more serious long-term indicator, because it could be
a sign of overtraining. this happens as a result of excessive stresses, both
physical and psychological, so its important to also be aware of environmental
and lifestyle factors. these include things like stressful life events (e.g., exams,
changing jobs, publisher deadlines, etc.), sleep deprivation, and inadequate
nutrition.
you might experience systemic fatigue as an inability to fully wake up;
ironically this is often accompanied by an inability to fall asleep (in spite of
the fatigue). you may have brain fog, feel sluggish or run down, or you might
experience any other descriptors for always tired.
ironically, one of the best ways to help alleviate some of this stress is
physical activity, although its typically the last thing you want to do during
these periods. most often, the key is that the activity is low intensity and
enjoyableyoure not trying to set personal records during this time.
if you can rule out lifestyle factors and external stresses but the fatigue
persists, its time to take an unplanned break from training. start with one
week completely off of lifting and reassess. if youre feeling refreshed and
eager to train again, youll likely come back with increased strength and
physical performance. theres nothing magical about a seven-day period,
so if you find that you need more time off, be sure to take it. if the systemic
fatigue persists after a layoff, you may want to consult a medical professional.
mood state
mood state offers another long-term indicator, from which prolonged
disturbances will usually imply a necessary reduction in training volume.
these disturbances could be everything from a lack of motivation to train
all the way up to depression. this subjective feeling of being burned out may
come with the physical component of chronic fatigue, but the symptoms are
idiosyncratic, which makes it more challenging to identify. disturbances in
mood state are most common in hard-training athletes who perform excessive
volume without enough rest.
the good news is that this kpi is simple to identify, and even small changes
could be detected before they become more serious. you might even notice
the mood changes on your own. additionally, there are various psychological
tests that can be taken, such as the profile of mood states (poms). these tests
are simple, effective, free, and widely available. finally, tests like the poms
can be used for personal assessment but become even more informative when
externally reviewed, typically by a coach or personal trainer.
intraworkout kpis
along with gravity-restricted training, the one-repetition maximum (1rm)
and subsequent prescriptive loading (percent 1rm) have achieved the exercise
equivalent of brand annihilation. this is the marketing term applied when
a specific brand name comes to represent an entire product category, such as
referring to all facial tissue as kleenex (which is a trademarked brand name
for a specific product). similarly, the 1rm seems to be the only game in town
when it comes to evaluating your training or progression.
despite their ubiquity, general programs based on percent rm load seems
to imply clairvoyancethey predict how youll respond, and they use strength
sidebarr: time travel revelation
the kpi upgrade is one of many inspired by engineer and cofounder
of keiser equipment, dennis keiser. he blew my mind with a friendly
and enlightening challenge that i now pose to you:
think about your life today and try to imagine what it would have
been like  years ago. which aspects would be the same, and which
would be different? (dennis keiser, pers. comm.).
the simple answer is that nearly everything would be differ-
entprofoundly so. as a result, any similarities you could retain
are exceptional and noteworthy. if you couldnt think of any, which
is common and acceptable, heres the punch line: in spite of the end-
less differences, your training would be incredibly similar to what it
is today, if not identical.
think about that. of all the changes in the past century, your train-
ing would not be one of them. now consider that although barbells,
dumbbells, and kettlebells existed even back then, you could take
your time-traveling delorean (or tardis) back further and still fi nd
gravity-based loads to use for exercise. this ranges from using rocks
and dinosaurs as resistance, to body-weight calisthenics and even
cardio (e.g., running away from the dinosaur that you just tried to lift).
i should warn you that the more you think about this, only to fi nd
that training with gravity resistance might be the only consistent
thread throughout, the more mind-blowing this idea becomes.
this is why the exclusive use of gravity loads (aka iron) and per-
cent rms refl ect what is known as iron age thinking and iron age
training (aka dinosaur training).
as the defining parameter. but after our dissection of the targeted anatomy
of a rep (in chapter ) and the importance of muscle stimulation (chapter
), it may be easier to see why prescribing exercise using a predetermined
percent of your maximum is also incredibly limiting. lets explore this critical
point so you can add programming to your list of massive upgrades (to give
you massive arms).
weve spent so much time dissecting and upgrading the five key targets
concepts (related to training and stimulating muscle growth) that it would
be surprising, if not overtly hypocritical, if we couldnt do the same for
our programming progressions. after all, the traditional prescription and
progression via percent rm is completely reliant on both gravity-based loads
and the limits of the concentric rep. it also fails to take into account the
individual differences for both training stimuli and for subsequent adaptive
responses.
worse yet, using a weekly increase in percent rm to both predict and
measure progress feeds the parasite that is our ego. erroneously, this
translates into the thinking, and then practice, that more weight is better.
so, in addition to the perceived progress of adding weight (i.e., numbers
going up), were psychologically programmed by our ego to feel better about
ourselves by lifting more. this happens irrespective of actual measurement
or progress and leads to the loosey goosey training technique that you find
every time you walk into a gym. surely, we can do better.
kpi upgraderpe
a more effective kpi would need to overcome many of the restrictions
encountered with percent rms, apply to a broader range of resistance types,
and offer greater personalization. better yet, well use a real-time kpi that
does the following:
 it works with traditional gravity-based loads, sets, and reps.
 it works with different types of nongravity resistance, like bands.
 it works across different contraction types and roms.
 it promotes functional stimulation rather than excessive weight.
 it is personalized to your weekly progress.
 it is personalized to the workout day itself.
given the hyperbole that the fitness industry is infamous for, you might
be thinking, so much [sic] upgrades? but david, thats unpossible [sic]! but
this magical kpi is nothing more than your own effort, which weve seen
expressed as rating of perceived exertion (rpe) (chapter ). youll use
the -point rpe scale or a  to  percent effort scale to evaluate how
hard youre working and make changes as needed, even within the workout.
although it may be a bit of a stretch to think of effort as a kpi, it fits our broad
definition of personalized feedback used to affect training.
generally speaking, this type of real-time evaluation and adjustment is
known as autoregulationthe use of personal feedback to adjust your
training to your abilities on that day. you might think of it as training by feel.
this technique provides a level of specificity, not only for each individual,
but also within each workout.
for example, everyone has a day when they feel off of their game. whether
its due to a lack of sleep, poor nutrition, or just general psychological stress,
this common occurrence will affect your workout. using rpe allows you
to tailor your load to this suboptimal state, ensuring that your workout is
optimal for that day.
one potential downside happens due to the subjective nature of relative
intensity. this means that the concept of hard will be different among
individuals, resulting in some people pushing themselves too much, while
others wont push at all. in my experience, the latter is common with children,
while you are more likely to drift toward the former.
this prospective issue has been addressed by an expert in this area, dr.
eric helms, using a technique called anchoring. this is the process of
standardizing intensity among individuals. in your case, youll establish this
anchor by completing a set to failure, so youll really know what an rpe of
 feels like.
reps in reserve
autoregulation works cohesively with another research-based method first
introduced to me by dr. mike israetel, called reps in reserve (rir; helms
et al. ). this is an estimation of how many reps you have left in the tank
when you complete a set. for example, if you perform a set of  reps with
moderate-high intensity, you might feel like you are able to perform  more
before failure. this would mean that you performed the set with two rir.
rir = estimated maximum reps  chosen number of reps
as with effort, rir may not traditionally be thought of as a kpi, but it
checks the boxes for personalized feedback and training impact. youll
organically develop your skill to predict rir along with that of rpe, which
makes it a natural adjunct with autogenic training. eventually, youll be able
to predict how many reps you can perform with a given load, just by feel.
note that the greater your effort during a set, the fewer reps youll have left
in the tank. this rpe and rir relationship is illustrated in table .. the rpe
of  reflects maximal intensity (aka  percent intensity) and momentary
muscular failure, such that no further reps could be performed with full rom
and tight form (aka zero rir).
the six kpis are summarized for quick reference in table ..
table . crossover between rpe and rir scales
rpe rir
table . summary of kpis
postworkout
short-term long term
doms systemic fatigue
muscle fatigue negative mood state
intraworkout
relative effort rpe
anticipated actions rir
test with  percent failure rate
as with every other component of arm training, the more you use this skill,
the better you become (ormsbee et al. ). so, despite the name, theres
no pass or fail herethe test is all about developing your personalized skill
in assessing rir and anchoring maximal rpe. the early objective is to get
the feel of muscle fatigue and rpe as you approach momentary muscular
failure (rir = ).
imagine that you want to assess your rir on triceps push-downs. based on
your experience, you estimate that you can perform a maximum of  reps
with  pounds ( kg; i.e., you could not perform a 13th rep with tight form). if
youre trying to stop the set with an intensity of two rir, youd be performing
 reps with this load. after a first work set, you can increase the fidelity of
this estimate through an assessment (by going to failure). this will provide
the feedback from which you establish your rir during the next workout.
so, if you estimate a -rep max but hit failure at  reps, youve only
slightly overestimated your rir. if, on the other hand, you performed 
reps, youve underestimated your rir and will want to increase the load to
maintain perceived intensity.
importantly, assessment is all about providing you with personalized
information that no one else can give you. remember, the point is to
organically upgrade your skill; its not about being right or wrong. just as
with exercise technique, even the most advanced lifters on the planet are
continually developing this skill.
at most, this test can be conducted once weekly, outside of deload and off
weeks. also, you can record yourself during these sets to ensure that your
form on the final maximal effort rep, is nearly identical to that of the first. the
anchor is at zero rir, so as we move farther away from the point of failure,
our ability to accurately predict rir decreases. for this reason, increasing
rir beyond five is not advised for work sets. if lighter intensity is employed
for a deload, then theres no need to use rir.
sidebarr: is perfect form perfect for you?
from experience, i can tell you that maintaining rigorous exercise
technique, proper breathing and bracing, momentum-free movement,
and intensely focused muscle contraction on every rep might be effec-
tive, but its exhausting. so, although we want to initially find our
personalized ideals for each rep (to learn the movement and the rir,
for example), the resulting high rpe ensures that it is not a realistic
long-term training plan.
one reason is that youll have new elements to focus on during new
exercises, and each has an initial energetic cost that raises rpe. this
isnt a problem, but it is something to be aware of during execution and
subsequent evaluation. although the early training blocks require a
signifi cant amount of mental energy, this is a short-term investment
that will be overwhelmingly worth your while.
as we come to appreciate maximal muscle contraction, newfound
core strength, and so on, they will start to become automatic, so well
be able to slightly relax the intensity of our focus on these elements.
this decreases the overall intensity of the workout and often comes
as a welcome reprieve.
lastly, it is important that you develop a baseline understanding of
what strict form feels like throughout the rom, so you know to what
extent you may be deviating as you fatigue. when you become very
profi cient, you can do so strategically (e.g., using a little momentum
after the fi nal concentric to perform an extra exaggerated eccentric
rep). this type of reality injection is an effective way to maintain
long-term workout effectiveness and enjoyment.
principle of progression
different training parameters provide different levels of growth stimuli
between individuals. some people have muscle that is best stimulated by
high tut (e.g., high reps and lighter load), while others by heavier loads
and minimal fatigue. even when an ideal stimulus is used, the subsequent
magnitude of adaptive response (e.g., amount of resulting growth and
strength) differs between people.
rather than feeling overwhelmed by this and experiencing paralysis
by analysis, know that this is where the art and science of programming
synergize. it is with this awareness that we need to start with generalized
training templates. by striking a balance between following a template and
adjusting based on your own training response, youll set yourself up for
much greater success.
getting started
in spite of the limits, theres no getting around the use of load-based
progressions while you feel your way through the program. but instead of
relying on load alone, youll use the upgrades in your kpi toolbox to refine
your training and develop your skills.
begin with a load-based progression and record rpe on each set. adding
a video of the set can provide feedback about prospective underestimation.
for example, imagine that you record an rpe of seven after a set of triceps
extensions. but during video playback, you see that theres so much hip
flexion and extension throughout, that you initially mistake the exercise for
a romanian deadlift. this is a great indicator that you need to drop the load,
reestablish the feeling of tight form, and reevaluate your rpe.
it must be reemphasized that youll have far better results when you focus
on developing your training skills (e.g., bracing, establishing rpe, etc.), rather
than trying to progress by simply throwing on weight.
the desired rep limit decreases a little each week, which allows you to
establish the feel for each exercise across a small change in load. on average,
this will result in a  to  percent weekly increase in load. note that your
rpe also increases each week, which develops your familiarity with higher
intensity. by the end of the first training block, youll perform the final set of
each exercise to failure. this provides a strong training stimulus and allows
you to anchor maximal intensity.
as a final reminder, if the training volume or frequency ever seems
excessively high or inadequately low as shown in the template, that perception
is merely an artifact of traditional programming*. you control every aspect of
the stimulus based on the insights gleaned from your kpis. so, if you need
more or less of any parameter (such as sets per exercise), you have the power
to make these changes and personalize your training blueprint.
*this double meaning of programming refers to a training plan, as well as
cognitive inculcation.
rational program structure
the program is organized by different levels of time, and youll find it easier
to take in if you use the summary tables . and . to follow along with the
written description. the broadest period is a mesocycle or phase, which is a
general description of the program goal. for example the mesocycle in table
 is the metabolic hypertrophy foundation phase.
this mesocycle lasts for  total weeks and consists of two training blocks,
each concluded with a deload or rest week. the training blocks themselves
are composed of five microcyclesone per week. the weekly microcycle
consists of two workouts per muscle group, simply called day  and day .
week  of phase  is a deload week, during which volume and intensity are
reduced, and week  is a complete active rest week.
metabolic hypertrophy foundation program
this is the most important phase of your program because it establishes the
baseline for the rest of your training. stated differently, this is where your
personalized training domination begins. it is here where you practice your
new skills, get the feel of new exercises, establish your training loads, and
start to evaluate your specific needs (based on kpis).
when establishing week  intensity (rpe), aim for a load that will allow
you to perform about  reps. if assessed correctly, this will start off feeling
light but should become challenging by the end of each set. perform up to
 reps per set, as long as you feel like you could perform more. if, by rep ,
you feel like you could keep going past , reassess your internal tension and
locus of focus. when you are confident that youve optimized this, add weight.
table . the metabolic hypertrophy foundation program overview
sets per exercise 
exercises per arm group 
tempo (tut) ///
interset rest  min
table . the metabolic hypertrophy foundation program
mesocycle metabolic hypertrophy foundation
block block  block 
microcycle or week          
reps     deload     off
rpe - -  -* deload - -  -* off
*the last set of each arm exercise is performed to failure.
table . workouts within a microcycle
monday tuesday wednesday thursday friday saturday sunday
biceps triceps off or biceps triceps off or off
day  day  recovery day  day  recovery
work work
barbell curl bench preacher banded
(p. ) press curl (p. ) push-up
(p. ) (p. )
reverse lunge suspension bulgarian pull-down,
(p. ) high-elbow split squat pull-up
row (p. ) (p. ) (p. )
cable flex curl seated incline overhead
(p. ) overhead dumbbell rope
extension curl (p. )
(p. ) (p. )
cable fly goblet kettlebell quad-
(p. ) squat press focused
(p. ) (p. ) squat
(p. )
x-body pit stain pronated supinated
hammer curl press barbell curl extension
(p. ) (p. ) (p. ) (p. )
ball hamstring suitcase
curl (p. ) carry
(p. )
with exercises for the six foundational movement patterns, maintain the
approximate rep scheme but throttle your intensity to  to  percent so that
you can focus your efforts on your arm exercises. the exercises are broken
down by workout within a microcycle, shown in table ..
week  (deload)
this is an active recovery week that will be very helpful after the week 
microcycle. perform sets of  reps with about half the load used in week .
as a literal change of pace, the tempo of each rep can be increased.
block 
this second block of phase  is identical to the first block with a couple of
notable exceptions. your loads will be slightly greater having progressed
through block . perform the last rep of each arm exercise with a three-
second eccentric portion. this will help you develop a little more muscle
toughness. lastly, rather than a deload after the first four weeks, the final
week is completely off to recharge your batteries for your next program.
your next training phase can repeat the first two blocks while experimenting
with different exercises, intensities, and so on. as an advanced alternative, a
strength phase can be performed, which provides different stimuli and might
serve a refreshing change. this phase is added in advanced programming.
wrap-up
along with building muscle, youve also developed a huge knowledge base
from the preceding chapters. as you synthesize that information, youll see
that this chapter offers the next organic steps: programming and personalized
kpis. developing the skills of personal awareness from using these kpis comes
with the gift of becoming more in tune with both your mind and body. this
effect is enhanced when used in conjunction with the hypertrophy training
template, which collectively serves as a quick start guide. by the time youre
through the program, youll have acquired the tools to turn any training
template into your own personalized blueprint for muscle construction.
this page intentionally left blank
lliimmiitteedd--eeqquuiippmmeenntt
ttrraaiinniinngg
if youve ever been stranded on a desert island, trapped in the past because
of a temporal paradox, or isolated due to a pandemic, youve experienced
the challenges that come with limited equipment options. but even if you
cant yet relate there will come a time when you are forced to train with
limited equipment, during which it may seem as though stimulating muscle
growth is an impossible task. this is especially true of youre used to lifting
in a commercial gym with every conceivable tool at your disposal. but there
are surprising advantages to limited-equipment training. in fact, i
recommend that all clients adopt a limited-equipment program for two weeks
(bare minimum) at least once a year.
there are at least three benefits youll experience from doing so:
 physical and psychological freedom
 long-term physical preparedness and resilience
 peak muscle activation
even if used for a short time, each of these benefits will help to improve
subsequent gym workouts and your overall physique development. lets take a
closer look to see how limited-equipment training can be a huge benefit to you.
physical and psychological freedom
we may get into a groove with training, which can creep into a habit of doing
the same things over and over. this breeds complacency, and what began as
smooth progress becomes a rut. what once served as guide rails turn into
walls, and we find ourselves stuck. all too often, it is only when forced from
our groove that we resort to novelty and innovation.
weve beaten to death the limits we impose with concentric exercises,
gravity-based loads, and percent rmbased progressions. and with limited
equipment, theyve all gone out the window. what, dear reader, are we to do
about it? hint: if youve read the nine preceding chapters, you may already
know.
in answering, it may seem as though the entire purpose of this book
has been to set you up for success in this one chapter. adopting a broader
perspective reveals that limited-equipment training is only one scenario you
can encounter, but the principles established in the preceding chapters
empower you to be prepared for any situation.
before continuing, we have to pause for a moment to appreciate the irony.
by limiting our training options, we actually experience the freedom from
our long-established cognitive and physical constraints.
long-term physical preparedness
and resilience
limited-equipment training helps you get in touch with your core, and
proactively fix weak points you probably didnt know you had. this powerful
concept was best illustrated to me by pain free performance specialist
certification (ppsc) chief operating officer clifton harski, who suggests
that our natural inclination toward training our strengths is like developing
a callus on your hand. just as our muscle becomes stronger with training, a
callus is an adaptation of our skin, which becomes thicker and more protective
against localized friction (e.g., at the base of our fingers). this natural response
is great for specific stimuli, but when we apply novel stresses outside of our
adapted range, damage can result, even if those stresses are relatively small
compared to what were used to handling within our usual range.
for example, calluses dont rip at their thick center, but around the weaker
outside portion where the adaptation hasnt occurred. the same adaptive
specificity can happen with training. as a simple example, consider the typical
gym member who executes the barbell bench press with only the upper
one third of range of motion (rom). he may become quite well adapted to
this upper portion of the movement, but when he moves outside this range
(intentional or not), his body has no idea whats going on. because he lacks
the structural or neural adaptations to allow for this rom when loaded, he
loses control and ends up stapled to the bench.
this is probably the simplest of many examples to illustrate adaptive
specificity using different training parameters. to appreciate the breadth
of this rabbit hole, you may also recognize the hubris of performing a light
but novel thigh adductor exercise and experiencing days of pain as a result
(chapter ). a final example happens during situations when you need to react
quickly, such as when slipping on ice while walking your small dog, stepping
on a small dog bone, sitting on a small dog toy, or tripping on a small dog.
there are even situations not related to small dogs in which you may need
to react quickly, and it is the breadth of your physical preparedness that will
help you come through unscathed.
it may seem as though were exceptionally arm-focused herein, but were
really establishing the guiding principles that will help you develop long-term
resilience, health, and physique development. the previous examples help to
illustrate why achieving this long-term goal requires you to train the body
with a multitude of different exercises, loading patterns, roms, and so on.
this shouldnt seem daunting but perceived as an opportunity to keep things
interesting, have fun, and learn.
peak muscle activation
training with limited equipment helps you get in touch with your peak muscle
contraction. you can think of this as acquiring the skill to develop maximal
muscle contraction across different exercises. the way to do this is called
the full flex method, and you might recognize it as an exaggerated version
of the intrinsic locus of focus (key ).
in brief, youll develop the skill of maximal muscle recruitment to facilitate
the rest of your muscle stimulation. begin following preworkout activation
and a warm-up set (or two) of an exercise. perform a light or completely
deloaded rep that allows you to hold the peak contracted phase (at the end
of the concentric movement, before beginning the eccentric movement).
your goal is to identify and squeeze your working musculature as hard as
possible. imagine that youre on stage and trying to pose in front of hundreds
of peoplethats the level of contraction youre after.
the more you practice this, the harder youll be able to contract and the
more fibers youll recruit. also, youll come to identify how subtle tweaks in
contraction can activate muscles differently. this method works especially
well for recognizing what the hell is happening during exercises that involve
numerous active muscles, like a pull-up. the goal is to progressively improve
your ability to execute these peak contractions while using heavier loads to
better stimulate muscle growth. this full flex method helps to increase the
challenge during limited-equipment training, which youll see implemented
in the upcoming body-weight program.
optimize eccentric movements
traditionally, having access to limited equipment would make it slightly
more challenging for you to induce structural growth. this is an easy fix
because youll provide high-force stress stimuli to your arm musculature by
emphasizing elastic resistance-based eccentric overload techniques. the
following tips will help you to implement eccentric training and take advantage
of your full growth potential.
use the top  percent of your full rom
eccentric contractions are infamous for causing muscle damage and delayed-
onset muscle soreness (doms), which you know better as growth stimulation.
the more lengthened the muscle as its undergoing eccentric loading, the
greater the damage. eventually, this can be a powerful stimulus, but its easy
to overdo it. when starting out, it doesnt take much to damage or stimulate
muscle. for this reason, begin by using eccentric overload in the shortest 
percent of the eccentric rom, right after the concentric portion of the rep.
once proficiency is gained with these techniques and a good deal of muscle
toughness against eccentric damage has developed, this can be extended to
two thirds of the full rom.
use the two-up, one-down technique
youll use two limbs for the concentric part of an exercise, but the entire
eccentric load is handled by one. for example, perform the concentric part
of a two-handle cable biceps curl using both arms. execute the subsequent
eccentric with one arm while the other spots. another example is the banded
triceps push-down, in which one hand grasps the low point inside of a high-
anchored band with an overhand (pronated) grip. the other hand will help to
stretch the band to full elbow extension (i.e., perform the concentric part of
the movement), and if more tension is desired, body weight can help stretch
the band farther with both arms holding this locked elbow position. the
working arm then performs a one-arm eccentric movement.
use band-specific techniques
elastic resistance provides more opportunities to create an eccentric
overload on your arm musculature. for example, you can establish the end
concentric position of an exercise while there is minimal tension on the band.
by stepping away from the anchor point and lengthening the band, you can
greatly increase tension for the eccentric portion of the rep. as an example,
you begin the eccentric overloaded one-arm row by performing the concentric
movement close to the anchor, so that there is no tension on the band. while
holding the peak contraction position (supported by the nonworking arm),
you progressively step away from the anchor to stretch the band, until the
tension becomes much higher than could be realized through a traditional
concentric rep. the support arm is then removed, and the eccentric row is
resisted by the working arm.
stabilize as much as possible
if youve seen anyone squirm while performing a heavy bench press, youll
know that your whole body may want to get involved when fighting a heavy
load. this is especially true when youre getting used to the novel feeling of
trying to contract against a load thats overwhelming you (in spite of your
efforts). for maximal effectiveness, you want to minimize body movement and
maintain focus on the muscle by stabilizing your body as much as possible.
for example, along with bracing your core, your shoulder and arm can be
further stabilized by using the shoulder-lock technique. you might recognize
this as a reiteration of stabilizing tension from key , and its exaggerated
importance when using eccentric overload is warranted.
its worth emphasizing that this is one of the reasons that arm-specific
training really helps eccentric overload to shine. the isolated nature of
these movements minimizes the number of joints needed for stability, which
youll come to appreciate when performing these high-tension exercises. as
an example, consider how little eccentric overload you could apply during
a single leg squat. in contrast, perform the same mental exercise with a
concentration curl. it should be clear that greater stability allows for a more
productive eccentric overload.
use cluster training
unlike traditional sets that use consecutive repetitions to induce fatigue
(remember the con-con-lim), eccentric overload training emphasizes the
amount of force produced during individual reps. for this reason, it is best
to use cluster training, in which a brief rest (e.g., a few seconds) is taken
between each pair of reps. alternating arms with each rep is another option
for minimizing the reduction in force output you experience as your muscle
fatigues, while also improving efficiency (i.e., less overall workout time). the
result is that youll have maximal strength available for each rep (i.e., more
force = more gains).
pull-up progressions
for loading adjustments
not only is the pull-up a great exercise overall, but it ties together the elements
of this chapter: body weight, band training, and eccentric overload. youve seen
the pull-up, pull-down technique description, but the available progressions
give the perfect opportunity to showcase this common exercise.
progression banded assistance
as a progression, bands can be looped from the overhead bar (or wherever
you grip) and one of your knees placed through the hanging loop. this will
provide progressively greater assistance, rather than resistance, as you
descend. when you begin to pull up, you may opt to accelerate your body
weight from the bottom, taking advantage of the assistance the stretched
elastic provides out of the hole. this is helpful for reaching the challenging
top portion of the exercise.
progression body-weight eccentric movement
a full body-weight eccentric movement or two can be added as a final cluster
set once the banded sets are complete. this gives the feel of the full unassisted
movement and a lot of muscle growth stimulus. note that doms may be significant
the first time this is done but should be greatly reduced in magnitude each time
it is performed.
for the unassisted eccentric position, you will use your legs to get into the
top position using a rack, bench, or other apparatus. after establishing the peak
contracted (i.e., starting position) with your upper body, you can remove your
first supporting leg and then the other, to ensure stability (i.e., no swaying). this
is similar to the way in which you step back with one leg at a time to stabilize
your body for a push-up.
jumping pull-ups, in which you try to establish starting position by jumping
into place, are a suboptimal last resort because they dont allow you to establish
a stable peak contraction before performing the eccentric.
progression added load
as a final progression, more overload can be provided by attaching a plate to
a weight belt, through the use of a hanging support chain. it can be a difficult
position to set up, but ive found that initially having slack in the loaded chain
helps you to set your hands with the correct placement, so you can then use your
lower body to get into starting position.
as an alternative, a dumbbell may be between your knees when they are flexed
at  degrees. it allows you to support a dumbbell between your upper calves,
although it requires a spotter to place and remove.
bare bones body-weight training
whether youre a calisthenic-inspired body-weight enthusiast or just want to mix
up your workout, switching to body-weight training will give your brain and body
the refreshing changes they need.
the best support of bare bones body-weight training comes from one of my
greatest training influencers and owner of claytonfit.com, nick clayton:
bodyweight training is a golden opportunity often missed by gym rats,
because its one of the most efficient ways to improve total body strength,
coordination, and stability. the result is a noticeable carryover to your
physique and subsequent performance, both in and out of the gym (nick
clayton, pers. comm.).
body-weight training is traditionally more focused on the strength and skill of
calisthenic movements, rather than pure muscle hypertrophy. you can probably
think of male gymnasts with huge arms, which helps sell the benefit, just as the
physique of a pro bodybuilder helps to sell supplements. but in our reality,
its important to recognize that the physiques of the genetic elite were not
the result of an optimized arm-training program. we did not win the genetic
lottery, so we have to train smarter.
although a great deal of muscle can be developed in this way, body weight
has limitations, particularly when it comes to arm-specific hypertrophy. as an
example, the limited ability to load a push-up might mean that this exercise
is useless for developing massive arms. for a welcome rebuttal, consider the
sidebarr.
sidebarr: the high rep heresy
witnessing history can be a great experience even if observed from
the sidelines. in this case, i happened to be moderating what was to
become a landmark presentation at a personal training conference.
during the talk, the presenter had the audacity to suggest that high-
rep training (-) was as effective as lower rep training (-) for
muscle growth. this statement was clearly heretical, because at the
time everyone knew that  to  was the rep range for growth. fol-
lowing the presentation, a palpable unease permeated the audience
as they performed the mental gymnastics to refute the blasphemous
information and maintain the comfort of the status quo. during that
time (which can only be described as the stunned silence), you could
almost imagine the faint echo of pitchforks being sharpened and cries
of, hes a witch! he turned me into a newt!
although the paradigm shift was initially met with psychological
resistance, the credibility of the speaker won the day. the talk was
delivered by noted hypertrophy expert dr. brad schoenfeld, whose
research contributions and training book, the m.a.x. muscle plan,
have repeatedly inspired this very work. further, on that day he was
not merely spouting his subjective opinion, but rather presenting
objective data (schoenfeld et al. ).
observing those data through a lens of precision microtargeting
(key ), we can interpret the result as high reps created a greater
metabolic stimulus, at the expense of structural growth. as a takeaway,
you can fi nd comfort in knowing that even with little equipment, high-
rep training will give you results. better yet, well make the training-
induced metabolic stress more time effi cient for you and forgo any
compromise by including an eccentric emphasis for structural growth.
program : the body-weight program
because of their brief duration and high rating of perceived exertion (rpe),
the arm exercises are performed at the beginning of a body-weight session
or as their own separate arm training day (table .).
option : if these exercises are added to a body-weight workout, choose
either biceps or triceps exercises, saving the other muscle group for the
next session.
option : if youre performing a full arm-specific training day, swap out the
modified muscle-up for triceps walks. otherwise, the carryover between
pull-ups and muscle-ups will limit your strength potential on both.
this workout puts you in the drivers seat for dictating load and intensity.
each exercise can be modified to offer some assistance during the concentric
phase, so that the resistance approximates a 15rm, while the eccentric
movement is performed for two seconds by minimizing this assistance. the
description of pull-up progressions shows an example of how resistance can
be decreased or increased, based on your needs.
theres no objective measure of load, so rpe, total repetition number, and
your subsequent doms will dictate arm training volume. intense contractions
are emphasized, and the goal is to complete the number of repetitions within
the given time frame, rather than performing traditional consecutive reps
and sets. this means that if you need to take a -second break after a rep,
you should do so. start with an rpe of six and progressively increase for
two weeks based on resulting doms and familiarity with the exercises. as
you become stronger and more skilled with each exercise, youll organically
develop the accompanying skill of precisely dictating rpe.
week :  total reps per exercise, within two min, rpe of six
week :  total reps per exercise, within three min, rpe of seven
week :  total reps per exercise, within four min, rpe of eight
the week refers to calendar week, irrespective of your training frequency.
this means that the same repetition goal is used for every arm-training set,
whether youre performing it once or three times that week.
table . arm-specific body-weight workout overview
day  day 
exercise  nilsson curl modified muscle-up
(p. ) (p. )
exercise  pull-up tiger bends (p. )
nonarm movements nonarm movements
finisher rice bucket (p. ) push-up
the frequency of this training is dictated by your key performance indicator
of soreness, which means that it can occur as frequently or infrequently as
you need. for example, if you dont feel anything after your first workout,
you can perform again two days later and increase the load on the eccentric
portion. conversely, if you find yourself too sore and need a week off, back
off the eccentric loading. as you discover your response to each exercise,
remember that its better to start with less intensity and progressively ramp up
each workout, rather than go too hard out of the gate and be sore for a week.
there are two notable exceptions to the repetition scheme, each of which
is performed at the end of the workout.
 rice bucket work will finish off your grip using two sets of  seconds
(each arm).
 push-ups will use the same number of repetitions without an eccentric
overload, performed for a single set within one minute.
tips and variations
body-weight versions of the squat, hinge, and lunge can be performed for
sets of  to  reps and an rpe of seven. after assessing the degree of
doms from the arm training, horizontal pull exercises may be included with
reduced volume.
full flex method execution
 the full flex method can be used on each rep. this means that youll
squeeze the active muscles hard when it is in its maximally shortened
position (i.e., at the end of each concentric movement, before the eccentric
movement). this doesnt need to be held for any period of time; only take
as much time as necessary for you to feel maximal contraction.
sidebarr: the rpe advantage
you might immediately see the inherent advantages of rpe-based
training, because youre unable to use numerically specific loads with
body-weight or elastic resistance exercises. this limitation would
decrease the value of any attempt to provide traditional prescriptive
programming (e.g., sets, reps, percent repetition maximum load, etc.).
consider the example of pull-ups, for which there is huge variability
between individuals in their ability to execute. this means that if i
were to provide a subsequent rep range, id have to make it as broad
as  to . that range isnt guidanceits just an attempt to prove that
i can count (ostensibly using fingers and toes). so this application
provides another example of how by using rpe, you can make the
exercise as hard as you need, to personalize the resulting stimulation.
as a progression following your mastery over peak contractions, you
can then stop in the middle of the eccentric rep for a maximal squeeze
at this muscle length. this isometric pause is brief but incredibly
challenging to do, because the muscle is lengthened compared to peak
contraction. the greater the muscle length, the harder it becomes to dig
in and experience the full flex. as you develop this skill, youll be able to
translate its application beyond lighter loads and ensure maximal fiber
stimulation during reps with any load.
 remember that youre not using measured weights, so your load and
subsequent rpe will be regulated in real time by how much assistance
you use on each rep.
 although the rice bucket is not technically body-weight resistance, it fits
perfectly with this section. climbers, grapplers, and other body-weight
training athletes are among those who experience grip and forearm
improvements from this implement.
program : bare bones band training
this phase uses fast concentric contractions as a novel stimulus, along with
eccentric overload, to maximize growth. in the first week, you will work on
getting the feel of the movements, getting used to the strength curve of the
band resistance, and establishing your relative resistance (table .).
you can perform these workouts with nothing more than body weight,
elastic resistance, and an anchor point (pull-ups excluded). these implements
are considered bare minimum, because they are widely available, inexpensive,
and light. the latter translates into highly portable and useful in small spaces,
like an apartment or hotel room.
the stress stimulus of time under tension induces the metabolic
hypertrophy, and the eccentric overload reps cause predominantly structural
growth.
the fourth week of each block is a deload period, during which the load
is greatly reduced (without using any eccentric overload), or an active rest
period, in which no direct strength training is performed (table ., page ).
table . block  overview
sets per exercise 
exercises per arm group 
tempo (tut) ///*
interset rest - min
*with practice, a hard muscle squeeze in this shortened position should take less than
one second.
using soreness as a key performance indicator is especially important for
exaggerated eccentric training, because you want to ensure that you are fully
adapted before performing additional work on the muscle.
on the final set of each arm exercise, perform a single eccentric-overload
rep (typically by stretching the band to a greater degree) using a resistance
that will overload you within one or two seconds. it is natural to have to take
a couple of seconds for this setup before the final rep. increase the number
of eccentric overload reps by one per exercise, each week.
break-drop-brake technique
band tension increases as it is stretched, so it places most of the load on the
muscle at the end of the concentric rom and the beginning of the eccentric
rom. in contrast, a greater amount of desirable microtrauma happens when
there is tension on the muscle at a lengthened position (toward the end of the
eccentric rom). this limited rom of max tension is why bands are incredible
for introducing you to the novel skill of eccentric overload trainingthey
help to minimize excessive damage and soreness that would otherwise occur
with full rom loads.
the limitation is that as you become more advanced, youre potentially
limiting the amount of mechanical stress stimulus by deloading the most
damaging (read: stimulating) rom. also, individuals who train predominantly
with bands often find themselves excessively sore after they shift to gravity-
based loads. this is due to the novel loading at the end rom and can be
exacerbated by momentumneither of these variables are experienced (or
adapted to) with band training.
to counter this, well use the break-drop-brake technique (aka break
drop), which is inspired by the research of a strongman competitor whose
physique is reminiscent of the mountain from game of thrones, dr. jonathan
mike. among the findings, dr. mike and his all-star research team discovered
that faster eccentrics (with typical training loads; - percent 1rm) caused
greater soreness compared to those that are performed more slowly (mike et
al. ). if we extrapolate soreness to damage in this case, the result means
that were able to trigger a massive growth stimulusif we can find a safe
and strategic way to increase eccentric speed.
the key words here are safe and strategic, because although theres
potential to stimulate growth, haphazard application could result in injury.
to think of it in action, consider the imperceptible microcheats that many
people use on every rep. after the effort of the concentric movement, it is
common to briefly lose focus and subtly give up a little tension (i.e., rest)
as we begin the eccentric. this instinctive break builds a little momentum,
which we have to slow down as we come to the end of the rom. in some
cases, well even forgo a complete stop at the end. instead, we use a little
remaining momentum to help us bounce to transition from the eccentric to
the concentric part of the exercise. this often goes unnoticed, but it employs
a bit of our natural stretch reflex to cheat up the concentric portion.
note that both the organic braking (disproportionately applied force toward
the end of the eccentric rom) and bounce happen when the muscle is in a
lengthened position. at such longer muscle lengths, were more susceptible to
damage, which is something that we can take advantage of for maximal growth.
also note that potential muscle-related injury is likely highest during this
same lengthened rom, which is one reason why this break drop technique
is not recommended for standard resistance training. this method requires
experience and control in order to be employed safely. unfortunately, our
natural tendency to focus on load quantity over stimulation quality makes the
prospective use of unskilled, fast eccentric movements a recipe for disaster.
after the concentric movement and any prospective isometric contraction,
begin the eccentric movement with minimal resistance for the first  percent
of the rom. your goal is to then use only the remaining rom to fully stop the
load at the end of the eccentric part of the exercise.
this is best exemplified by a push-up, in which you drop to the floor from
full extension. instinctively, youll brake the movement before you break
your face, coming to a full stop at the bottom. other body-weight exercises,
such as the pull-up and nilsson curl, are not ideally suited for this technique
because we are likely to place excessive load on the shoulders. ripping your
humerus out of the glenoid fossa (aka shoulder socket) is contraindicated,
so rather than using a full drop, only a slightly faster eccentric movement is
performed for these exercises. also, rather than stopping at the end of the
eccentric rom, your goal is to stop just before this point.
recall that loaded stretching might feel good in the moment but is
contraindicated, which means that youre not trying to drop into a stretch.
because of the advanced nature of this technique, only use break drops
when you have the ability to perform at least  consecutive full rom reps
of an exercise.
when you are able to perform  consecutive reps on pull-ups or push-ups
(both are at the end of arm day ), replace their respective eccentric overload
reps with break drop reps.
block  (tables . and .) maintains similar tut but allows for a faster
eccentric portion of the rep and longer isometric hold (i.e., for a whole second).
an eccentric overload rep is performed on the final two sets of each arm
exercise, adding one rep per set each week. by week  you will be performing
six eccentric overload reps per exercise ( sets   reps).
table . block  overview
sets per exercise 
exercises per arm group 
tempo (tut) ///
interset rest - min
this four-day training program employs more intense arm-focused days
and lighter whole-body days. for simplicity, the training week has been shown
using seven days (table .). for your applied programming, the training
week is more accurately described as a microcycle, because its length consists
of two arm workouts (arms  and arms ), not necessarily a seven-day
week. stated differently, your microcycle (aka training week) is predicated
on completing the requisite workouts, irrespective of time. this means, for
example, if you overdo your arms  session on monday (day ) and doms
prevents you from executing arms  until the next monday (day ), this still
counts as a microcycle  workout. for this example, if youre ready to crush
the arms  workout on the second thursday ( days after you began), this
will count as the start of the second microcycle (aka week ).
table . summary of bare bones band training programming elements
mesocycle
block  
microcycle or week        
reps per set    deload    deload
eccentric overload reps        
rpe - -  deload - -  deload
table . microcycle using a seven-day training week
monday tuesday wednesday thursday friday saturday sunday
arms  body  off or arms  body  off or off or
recovery recovery recovery
work work work
standing rdl (p. ) caulfield bulgarian
curl (p. ) curl (p. ) split squat
(p. )
push-down suspension supinated suspension
(p. ) high row extension high-elbow
(p. ) (p. ) row (p. )
spider curl reverse incline curl quad-
(standing) lunge (p. ) focused
(p. ) (p. ) squat
(p. )
seated -arm -arm fly cross face kb press
overhead (p. ) extension (p. )
extension (p. )
(p. )
crush curl -arm row eccentric accessory
(p. ) (p. ) pull-up
(p. )
pit stain press goblet squat banded
(p. ) (p. ) push-up
(p. )
tips and variations
 banded variations are performed with the anchor point set to allow for
tension throughout the movement that is similar to the gravity-based
version. for example, the spider curl is normally executed face down on
a bench with dumbbells. the adapted version uses a band anchored at
shoulder height, and the movement is performed standing while facing
the rack with arms straight out in front of you (i.e., parallel to the ground)
throughout. similarly, an incline curl is mimicked by facing away from
the band attachment, so that your arms are behind you at the start of
the movement. an adapted goblet squat anchors the band low and the
other end is held in clasped hands, while you perform the squat facing
away from the anchor.
 eccentric pull-up progressions are well suited to this phase and can
even serve as an effective stimulus for arm musculature. the concentric
load should be light enough to allow for a rapid contraction, while the
eccentric load is maintained for the suggested duration.
 the end of the fourth training day can be used for accessory work, such
as abs, calves, or rice bucket training.
 to decrease the risk of excessive soreness resulting from eccentric
overload reps, fatigue from the preceding set is strategically used to
limit the amount of eccentric tension you use. this self-imposed throttle
progressively decreases in magnitude, which allows more eccentric
tension to be applied each week.
wrap-up
its usually easier to achieve metabolic stimulation with limited-equipment
training because body-weightbased movements can be deloaded and used
for high tut sets. it can more challenging to induce structural growth,
which is why weve emphasized eccentric reps in this section, most often via
resistance band overload.
to help you accomplish your arm training goals, weve covered two common
types of bare bones training: body weight and banded (aka elastic resistance).
a common thread that runs through their programming and descriptions
is an exaggerated eccentric emphasis. additionally, youve seen two new
techniques that will help you to take advantage of each opportunity: the full
flex method and the break drop.
aaddvvaanncceedd
pprrooggrraammmmiinngg
developing mastery of physique is analogous to becoming a master physicist.
you dont learn physics more quicky by starting with an advanced field like
quantum electrodynamics. in fact, doing so would probably hurt your progress.
although it may feel counterintuitive, the fastest way to reach your goal is
to start with the fundamentals and progress consistently. so, once youve
established the basics like bracing, tension, locus of focus, and so on, you
may need to implement advanced programming for continued growth or fat
loss. this should always come with a warning, because the term advanced
can be erroneously interpreted as somehow better, just as the word novice
may be seen as a pejorative.
like so many others, ive experienced this mistake in practice by jumping
into the very high-volume training programs of elite bodybuilders, thinking
that this was the secret to faster growth. it would have been great to take
advantage of the early days when just thinking about the gym could stimulate
muscle, but i got caught up in the more-is-better mentality. as a result of
having confused advanced training with faster gains, nearly everyone i know
has started out by lifting excessively and ended up frustrated, burned out,
or even injured.
in order to prevent others from repeating this mistake, each type of
programming in this book considers the specific needs of the person reading
it, as evidenced by the repeated importance of personalization. so, with this
in mind, well explore advanced programs for
 strength-based growth and
 fat loss training.
strength and muscle
this program is not offered as a privilege that has to be earned, but rather
an evolution that comes out of necessity. consider that as muscle adapts, it
becomes more resistant to the stresses we impose on it. as a consequence,
we have to find new methods of stimulating hypertrophy (i.e. the principle of
progression). one answer is the inclusion of heavier strength-focused training.
this more advanced program builds off of the physical foundation established
by higher rep hypertrophy phases, during which tendons and ligaments become
stronger and help to prepare you for heavier loads. additional experiences with
bracing, breathing, eccentrics, and reps in reserve (rir) will all contribute to
your success during this type of program.
although this is hypertrophy-focused training, the training split is divided
into three days: hypertrophy, whole body, and strength. the hypertrophy day
uses higher time under tension (tut) work used to target metabolic growth,
albeit at a lower relative effort (higher rpe training is saved for strength days).
(see table ..) now that youre more advanced, eccentric work will be used
with greater effectiveness and less resulting soreness. this is especially true
for kinetically accommodating resistance used on each hypertrophy day in
this sample program.
whole-body days employ exercises from the six foundational movements
as a temporary maintenance while you focus on advanced arm training. youll
choose an exercise to represent each of the movements (except for the carry,
which is covered by recovery days) and perform them for two to three sets at
a moderate (~%) relative intensity.
strength days are the focus for your intensity during this advanced program.
there are three main reasons why heavier strength training augments your
hypertrophy-specific training: structural hypertrophy, strength base, and
psychological adaptation.
structural hypertrophy
well apply key  (precision microtargeting) via heavy strength training,
because it attacks the component of growth known as structural hypertrophy
(also known as myofibrillar hypertrophy). the resulting stimulus causes
muscle to become more resistant to the stresses of heavy loading and damage.
table . advanced strength-based hypertrophy overview
sets per exercise 
hypertrophy day
tempo (tut) ///
interset rest  min
strength day
tempo (tut) ///
interset rest  min
strength base
moving heavier loads comes with the extrapolated benefit of being able to
apply the strength you develop in this program to subsequent hypertrophy
training. this means that by getting stronger overall, youll be able to use
heavier loads to generate a greater stimulus with higher rep hypertrophy
training. whether its from the increased confidence you gain by overcoming
sidebarr: reconsidering
repetition maximums
were delving into strength, which means that the concept of how much
you can lift often comes into play. in order to stay on target, lets reverse
engineer the concept and its application. its common to think of a one-
repetition maximum (1rm) as the maximum amount of weight you can
lift, but we can upgrade this older definition to improve its fidelity and
make it more consistent with anatomically targeted training (key ).
as we saw in chapter , the more advanced version considers the type
of resistance, both types of contractions, and the full rom. in doing
so the concentric constraint and con-rom become damning, because
they expose the 1rm as merely
the maximum weight that can be overcome () during the
weakest part of the rom, () of our weakest contraction, and
() using a gravity-based load.
in using this defi nition, it sounds as though traditional strength train-
ing is more appropriately identifi ed as weakness training. restricting
your stimulus to a small part of a range of motion of one type of con-
traction, while simply picking up and putting down heavy stuff, really
spells out how much opportunity we have for improvement. in fact, its
hard to think of other ideas that have evolved less over the past century.
this is why weve focused on the concept of stress stimulus (exempli-
fi ed by key , adaptive targeting) in this book to optimize your gains.
if your fundamental goal is to induces stresses on muscle that stimulate
it to grow, the high-fi delity defi nition of a 1rm has exposed the emperor for
having no clothes. the physical, and apparently cognitive, limits imposed
by these traditional reps explains why the use of prescriptive 1rm-based
loads are often constraints for your training. this doesnt mean that iron
age 1rms and their prescriptive use are bad or that they cant be help-
ful. it simply means that this gold standard has evolved. you now have
better, more personalized tools to fi t the job of stimulating muscle and
evaluating progressyour key performance indicators (kpis; further
discussed in the fat loss kpis section later in the chapter).
heavier weights or by causing a new type of central nervous system
adaptation, this strength leads to long-term growth.
psychological adaptation
mixing up the rep ranges, loads, and rest periods can be incredibly refreshing
for anyone. additional motivation comes from the rapid strength adaptations
that youll experience as you add weight to the bar each week. theres
something incredibly empowering about thisit just feels good to be strong!
get the most out of hypertrophy days
it may seem unusual for a hypertrophy training day to take a backseat to
anything during a growth-centric program, but the following tips will help
you iron out the kinks and push toward the goal of maximizing muscle size.
 the training intensity is decreased, which allows you to emphasize the
strength day. the number of work sets can be increased or decreased
according to your experience-based kpis.
 forearm work is incorporated at the end of the workout. along with
highly visible hypertrophy, increasing your grip strength will also help
with strength days.
 whole-body days are used for the six foundational movement patterns,
without inducing fatigue that would impair your upcoming strength
workout. this infrequent training is considered to be a temporary
maintenance phase for these movements, while you focus on arm
development.
 if you accidentally overdo it your hypertrophy day, the following day
would be ideal for recovery work.
 on the second four-week block, replace the first two exercises (clayton
curl and jm press) with drag curls and decline dumbbell extensions. this
will provide your joints some extra time to adapt.
 block  also adds eccentric reps to finish off each exercise, other than pin
press and forearm work (which are optional). these reps can be performed
as a cluster, completed within one minute after the final concentric phase.
this will add a progressive, challenging stimulus but should not cause
excessive delayed-onset muscle soreness (doms).
 conclude the final set of each block  arm-focused exercise (indicated
by an asterisk in table .) by adding  percent weight and performing
a single, four-second eccentric movement. this is a bonus stimulus that
does not count toward your rep total. progress by adding an additional
 percent per week to these reps, so that your final reps during week 
are  percent heavier than your working load. this will briefly increase
your relative effort, and the weights will feel heavier due to fatigue, but
they wont feel heavy compared to your strength days. note that your
perception of heavy will have changed after only one block of strength-
based training.
 in block , the treadmill press is consistently performed at  percent
of maximal effort, but it is progressed by increasing the weekly volume.
this will help you get used to this unusual, but potent resistance. begin
week  with a cluster set of six reps per arm total, performed with five
seconds rest between each. progressively add one cluster of six reps per
week according to your kpis, up to a maximum of  reps per arm.
 in block , the intensity of the treadmill press will increase each week.
this will help rewire your nervous system by tapping into more of your
force potential. perform two cluster sets of eight reps per arm, resting
as much time as needed between reps. your intensity will start at 
percent, progressing  percent per week up to  percent by week .
get the most out of strength days
even if youre pushing hard on each rep, it will probably feel as though youre
not doing much to stimulate growth on these days. this is especially true
when you become used to the pump and burn associated with higher rep (i.e.,
higher tut) sets. short-duration sets and long rest periods are hallmarks of
maximal strength straining, which is not only something youll get used to but
something youll actually come to appreciate. the goal of this program is still
hypertrophy training, but for these blocks, youll put your greater intensity
into the strength days (see tables .-). keep in mind the following points:
 your sets are brief, so make them count.
 use an external locus of focus in which youre trying to move the
implement. not only will this help you move more weight, but its also a
refreshing switch from using muscle contraction to move the load.
 the combination of brief sets and long duration between means that
rest periods will feel like an eternity. to maintain efficiency (and
sanity), you can perform alternating sets with exercises for each muscle
group (just as you might with any hypertrophy day). paired exercises
are shown below within the same cell, and rest will be two minutes
between them. for example, you can begin with your first set of barbell
curls followed two minutes later by a set of bench presses. after another
 seconds of rest, the next set of biceps curls is executed. theres
nothing magical about two minutes, so rest as long as you need to
crush the next set.
 you want to be as fresh as possible for each set. unlike sets with higher
tut, fatigue is your enemy here.
 as the loads become heavier and slow down the movement of each rep,
you can try to accelerate the weight for better muscle recruitment. recall
from chapter  that muscle recruitment is increased by the intent to
contract quickly. your goal is to stimulate the muscle and nervous system,
so ignore the instinct to use this tip as an excuse to employ momentum
as a cheat.
 bracing and generating internal tension have great synergy with strength
training. even though youre fighting heavier loads, it might feel easier
to brace because of the short set duration.
table . advanced strength-based hypertrophy blocks  and  overview
mesocycle advanced strength-based hypertrophy
block block  block 
microcycle or          
week
reps ;  ;  ;  ;  deload *;  *;  *;  *;  off
(hypertrophy;
strength)
relative intensity  ;  ;  ;  deload  ;   ;  off
(hypertrophy;
strength)
*add  percent to your weight and perform a single, four-second eccentric movement.
table . advanced strength-based hypertrophy block  week overview
monday tuesday wednesday thursday friday saturday sunday
rest or rest or rest or rest or
hypertrophy active active strength active active
day recovery whole body recovery day recovery recovery
clayton curl barbell curl
(p. ) (p. ) and
bench press
jm press
(p. )
(p. )
harski hammer concentration
curl (p. ) curl (p. ) and
overhead rope
pin press
extension
(p. )
(p. )
x-body hammer cable hammer
curl (p. ) curl (p. ) and
cable push-
treadmill press
down (p. )
(p. )
behind-the-back flexy bar bench
wrist curl (p. ) (p. )
wenning wrist
flicks (p. )
 maximize stability as much as possible. you dont have a ton of options
here, so just remember that the fewer joints that you have to worry about
stabilizing, the better. this is why concentration curls are exceptional,
even though they seem like the perfect antithesis of strength-based
training; the entire shoulder is supported during this exercise so you
can focus on moving the load.
 as a general follow-up to the previous point: when evaluating why youre
doing something, always come back to the rationale of your fundamental
goal, rather than tradition and witchcraft.
table . advanced strength-based hypertrophy blocks  and  overview
 the overhead rope extension can be awkward to set up and perform
with heavy loads. if it becomes too unwieldy, sets can be performed
mesocycle advanced strength-based hypertrophy
unilaterally (with one arm), with the resting arm serving as overhead
block block  block 
support for the working arm.
microcycle or          
 youre using relatively heavy loads, but you should not experience
week
significant doms in your arm muscles. your kpi for this day is discussed
reps ;  ;  ;  ;  deload *;  *;  *;  *;  off
(hypertrophy; in detail in the next section.
strength)  the flexy bar bench press is a great example of light accessory work that
relative intensity  ;  ;  ;  deload  ;   ;  off can be done to end a strength workout. it adds to your bullet proofing
(hypertrophy;
without detracting from your results.
strength)
*add  percent to your weight and perform a single, four-second eccentric movement.
table . advanced strength-based hypertrophy block  week overview
table . advanced strength-based hypertrophy block  week overview monday tuesday wednesday thursday friday saturday sunday
rest or rest or rest or rest or
monday tuesday wednesday thursday friday saturday sunday
hypertrophy active whole active strength active active
rest or rest or rest or rest or day recovery body recovery day recovery recovery
hypertrophy active active strength active active
drag curl* barbell curl
day recovery whole body recovery day recovery recovery
(p. ) (p. ) and
clayton curl barbell curl bench press
decline
(p. ) (p. ) and
dumbbell
(p. )
bench press
jm press extension*
(p. )
(p. ) (p. )
harski hammer concentration harski hammer concentration
curl (p. ) curl (p. ) and curl* (p. ) curl (p. )
overhead rope and overhead
pin press pin press*
extension rope extension
(p. ) (p. )
(p. ) (p. )
x-body hammer cable hammer x-body hammer cable hammer
curl (p. ) curl (p. ) and curl* (p. ) curl (p. )
cable push- and cable
treadmill press treadmill press
down (p. ) push-down
(p. ) (p. )
(p. )
behind-the-back flexy bar bench
behind-the-back flexy bar bench
wrist curl (p. ) (p. )
wrist curl (p. ) (p. )
wenning wrist
wenning wrist
flicks (p. )
flicks (p. )
*perform an additional eccentric rep at the end of the final set.
strength as a kpi
intuitively, youll want to start each new workout in search of additional five-
pound (. kg) plates to throw on the bar, but this is only part of the story.
while its possible that your training loads will increase with every strength
workout, your adaptations might not start off in such an obvious manner.
because a strength-focused workout can be such a contrast from traditional
high tut training, it might take you a couple of weeks just to get the right
weights on the bar. so dont worry if youre not seeing overt signs right away,
because the changes may be more subtle and the gains will come.
even if youre not bumping the load each workout, you should still
experience a progressive increase in perceived comfort with handling heavier
loads. also, the movements should progressively feel smoother and your
overall stability much greater. if youre not feeling these changes by the end
of the third strength-based workout (week ), its time to take a layoff (i.e.,
skip week ) and evaluate.
if this happens and you can rule out lifestyle factors (e.g., nutrition, sleep,
etc.), there are three likely reasons for your lack of progress. the first two
default to too much work and insufficient recovery adaptation, which you
may experience as general prolonged fatigue, lack of desire to train, or
mood disturbances. a mood profile assessment may help you to identify this.
whatever the cause, once youve identified the general problem (i.e., lack of
adaptation), youll evaluate and adjust, using the heuristics that follow.
prospective cause :
excessive hypertrophy work
if youve added sets to your hypertrophy day, roll back to a reduced volume.
similarly, if youre experiencing excessive doms after the hypertrophy day,
decrease the number of reps by  percent on your eccentric work.
prospective cause :
excessive strength work
early strength-based training should not be taking a toll on you physically, but
if it is, you need to back off the volume for the affected areas (e.g., excessive
triceps doms). a more likely scenario is cns burnout, in which case you
will decrease intensity (based on your rating of perceived exertion) by 
percent during phase .
note that even just taking a week off could resolve the problem, allowing
you to jump back in feeling stronger than ever. if this happens, consider
taking more frequent breaks from training and incorporating deload weeks.
its counterintuitive to train less and gain more, but listen to your body and
experience the results. this is what personalization is all about.
prospective cause :
insufficient strength work
if youre not getting stronger but not experiencing any of the common
symptoms associated with excessive training, you will actually need to add
volume to your strength workouts. begin with one additional set per strength
exercise and reevaluate after two weeks. note that as you add sets, your
postworkout fatigue will increase. compensate by decreasing the intensity
of your hypertrophy day by  percent.
note that a lack of hypertrophy work is not a factor with regard to the kpi
of strength increases.
fat loss training
even for the most zealous of growth-centric lifters, there will come a time
when fat loss is the goal. after all, theres no point in having great arms is all
your hard work is covered up. well explore the advanced programming for
fat loss, but unlike muscle growth, torching body fat has no direct stimulus.
instead, a general increase in energy expenditure versus consumption must
be achieved through exercise and diet. although an entire book could be
written about fat loss nutrition*, well touch on the important basics here.
fundamentally, the main concept of fat loss is as simple as burning more
energy, in the form of calories, than is consumed. the body then taps into
existing energy stores (e.g., body fat) to maintain energy needs during this
caloric deficit. the challenge happens because your body perceives this
controlled starvation as a threat to survival and wants to respond by getting
rid of your most metabolically active (read: energy consuming) tissue.
unfortunately, this energy-burning tissue is your hard-earned muscle. its
loss is a double negative, because less muscle means less muscularity, and
less -hour fat burning. the great news is that there are two main ways to
mitigate this breakdown: resistance training and protein intake.
resistance training
it may seem exceedingly obvious considering where youre reading this,
but think about how many people go on a diet (i.e., induce a caloric deficit
in an attempt to lose body fat) at some point in their life. of these, what is
the miniscule percentage of those who lift throughout this period of caloric
restriction? because you are one of those few, youre already ahead of the game.
* see the sidebarr on the next page.
sidebarr
if youre looking for a science-based source of nutrition information,
i recommend checking out nscas guide to sport and exercise
nutrition, second edition (human kinetics, ). i authored the
protein chapter and, yes, am horribly (horribly) biased.
protein intake
although youre dropping calories from nutrient sources (carbs and fats), youll
want to maintain or possibly even increase your protein intake. this will help
to preserve the metabolic machine that is your muscle. impactful evidence
of this came from the lab of one of my research mentors, dr. kevin tipton
(mettler, mitchell, and tipton ). the team found that among resistance-
trained athletes who underwent two weeks of caloric restriction, more lean
body mass was retained in a group that consumed . g of protein/kg body
weight compared to those who ingested  g protein/kg body weight daily.
zombie cardio
theres a lot of miscommunication about cardiovascular activity and fat
burning. most fundamentally, this comes with the iron age idea that resistance
training builds muscle, while cardio burns fat. this zombie myth needs to be
stabbed in the brain and then torched along with your body fat.
although cardio is a great secondary training method to burn calories,
resistance training is the priority. recall that your goal is to preserve (or even
build) muscle and stimulate energy expenditure over the course of each -
hour day. traditional low-intensity cardio might burn a greater proportion
of fat for energy while youre doing it, but the overall energy expenditure is
limited. this means less of a caloric deficit and therefore less fat loss over
 hours.
additionally, its important to know that the fat you burn can come from
different sources, like your blood or muscle stores, not necessarily the adipose
tissue covering your abs. this doesnt make cardio bad; it just means that
the hype of cardio and any associated short-term fat burning is overblown.
ideally, we want to find a way to make low intensity exercise work better for
you, which goes beyond calories or a transient fat-burning zone. it begins
by exploring your bodys metabolic machinery, which you can then upgrade
through a strategic combination of training and nutrition.
metabolic flexibility
your body has two main energy sources, one fast and one slow. carbs are an
inefficient, but quickly available source, which provide most of the energy
during lifts, for example. when youre not performing high-intensity exercise,
your body can rely on internal fat stores to meet energy demands. fats are
the most efficient energy source, which is why youre using them for energy
right now, but it takes a long time for this delivery system to ramp up when
demands increase (e.g., during exercise).
based on the demand, your body will shift back and forth between these
sources. for example, whenever fat burning is insufficient to provide adequate
energy, your body shifts to carb burning. this is important to know when you
have a goal of decreasing body fat, because youll want to make it easier for
your body to shift into a fat-burning state. this concept, called metabolic
flexibility (met flex), was introduced to me by dr. mike t. nelson, associate
professor at the carrick institute. he explains it in the following way,
metabolic flexibility refers to your bodys ability to shift between the use of
fat and carbs for energy. the more metabolically flexible you are, the better
your performance and fat loss (mike t. nelson, pers. comm).
along with your diet and resistance training, adding lower intensity activity
might help teach your body to burn fat. the simplest way to do this is to
ensure that you consume relatively more carbs for your lift, which will allow
you to have a better workout and greater muscle stimulus. to facilitate a shift
toward fat utilization, your lower intensity exercise occurs after a period of
relatively lower carb intake.
in contrast to the zombie myth discussed earlier, youre not worried about
the immediate effect of fat use during this exercise. youre using this strategy
for its potential to improve your long-term ability to use fat for energy (i.e.,
increase your met flex). the combination of maintaining muscle and a net
caloric expenditure, along with a greater proportion of that energy coming
from fat, will have you showing off triceps striations in no time.
sidebarr
if it seems like your muscles are deflating during this period, remember
from chapter  (recovery optimization) that your muscles are filled with
glycogen and water. burning through the stored carbs and losing some
of the accompanying water will naturally decrease muscle size until
you replenish those glycogen stores (via higher caloric or carb intake).
strategy : more calories burned
 increased caloric expenditure through muscle maintenance and growth
 prioritized resistance training
 increased relative protein intake
strategy : greater proportion of calories burned from fat
 improved met flex to increase the contribution of fat-derived calories
 low-intensity, low-impact sustained exercise
low-intensity exercise
as you begin to use a higher training volume, be aware that your low-
intensity exercise (also known as cardio) has the potential to interfere with
your resistance training. to mitigate this possibility, your low-intensity
training should be low impact and eccentric exercise free. this means that
youre better off using traditional cardio machines like a cycle ergometer or
elliptical machine, instead of running (for example). better yet, weve covered
another great tool for the job in previous chapterssled work. this provides
resistance in the horizontal plane, in contrast to the gravity-based vertical
loading you get from loaded carries or running. considering the large amount
of training volume on your legs during this program, you want to minimize
further vertical loading.
you can use the arm-focused movements discussed earlier, but youll
predominantly use consistent pace walking, either pushing on the sled or
pulling it by walking away. during this sustained sled work, youll maintain
consistent tension on the connector as you walk against the resistance of the
load (unlike repetition-based sled work).
fat loss kpis
the fat loss program is considered to be advanced, because it builds off of
the principles that youve honed through practice, such as locus of focus.
this will ensure that you can stimulate the muscle to a greater degree, which
helps to achieve the results youre after. additionally, youll have had practice
with the anatomically targeted exercises, which gives you a background of
your personalized kpis. armed with this knowledge, you can track relative
changes in your strength along with how quickly you fatigue during a set.
you should be able to maintain your strength and rir estimates with
this program, and slight changes in these kpis are nothing to worry about
(especially as you feel your way through the new diet). what you want to
watch for are abrupt changes in strength or rir. although it could just reflect
an off day, if it happens in consecutive workouts, youll want to respond by
evaluating your diet and training.
although the adjustment will take the form of increased calories or reduced
training load, we dont want to go too far beyond the wide-ranging examples
in the list that follows. note that the breadth of these changes also serves to
illustrate why this is an advanced program: there are a lot of considerations
and components to evaluate and potentially adjust. generalized examples of
prospective changes include the following:
 increased carb intake in the hours before your lift
 increased daily protein intake
 decreased volume of low-intensity exercise
 taking a day or two off from training
 stopping the caloric restriction altogether
when using a calorie-restricted diet simply to look better, rather than for
health reasons, its important to know that you can stop it at any time, for any
reason. fat loss wont come without sacrifice, but theres no need to agonize.
the most effective fat loss diet is the one that you can stick with. so if
youre just not into it this time around, stop and reset.
among the many preventable issues youve seen to achieve successful
long-term fat loss, the final upgrade happens when you increase calorie
consumption to prestarvation levels. although traditional thinking is that one
can go on a diet to lose body fat, only to return to the same prediet conditions
that increased adiposity in the first place, this, combined with changes in scale
weight, is what contributes to yo-yo dieting. the greatest success happens
when you continually make small incremental changes to your lifestyle,
engrain these changes as habits, and celebrate the accomplishment of each
progressive upgrade.
as a personalized gauge of exercise intensity, you will use the progressive
talk test. this means that you want to exert the maximal amount of effort
that will enable you to speak normally (without excessive panting). the
progressive element considers the slow ramp-up of fat metabolism that
happens during this type of exercise. throughout each low-intensity workout
(starting from minute ), youll continually provide more and more of your
energy needs with fat. this natural shifting toward high-yield fat metabolism
means that youll be able to gradually increase intensity within each session.
as you become more metabolically flexible over the long term, youll notice
this shift happen earlier and to a greater degree.
this program is a modified version of the four-day program from chapter 
(table .). the main difference is the inclusion of two low-intensity days. the
duration (in minutes) of these sessions is indicated in tables .-.
table . advanced fat loss training overview
sets per exercise 
exercises per arm group 
tempo (tut) ///
interset rest  min
table . advanced fat loss blocks  and  overview
mesocycle advanced fat loss
block block  block 
microcycle or week          
reps     deload     off
rir     deload     off
low-intensity duration          off
table . advanced fat loss block  week overview
monday tuesday wednesday thursday friday saturday sunday
low low
biceps triceps intensity biceps triceps intensity
day  day  sustained day  day  sustained off
barbell curl bench press preacher banded
(p. ) (p. ) curl (p. ) push-up
(p. )
reverse lunge suspension bulgarian pull-down,
(p. ) high row split squat pull-up
(p. ) (p. ) (p. )
cable flex curl seated incline overhead
(p. ) overhead dumbbell rope
dumbbell curl (p. ) extension
extension (p. )
(p. )
cable fly goblet kettlebell quad-
(p. ) squat press focused
(p. ) (p. ) squat
(p. )
x-body pit stain pronated supinated
hammer curl press barbell curl cable
(p. ) (p. ) (p. ) extension
ball hamstring suitcase (p. )
curl (p. ) carry
(p. )
wrap-up
this ultimate chapter builds on your preexisting physical preparation and
highlights advanced methods of strength-based growth and training for fat
loss. the use of strength for growth may seem contradictory at first but can
be a great fit once youve established solid physical condition through the
application of earlier chapters. even if youre not fat-focused yet, there will
come a time when you are. once again, the associated advanced program will
help you to chisel your physique from the rock-solid foundation developed
through earlier chapters.
ultimate sidebarr
although this book is the result of nearly three decades of obsession,
education, and experimentation, the greatest innovation comes from
the dozens of would-be contributors who have taught me along the
way. as that brilliant torch is passed, it is worth offering one final side-
barr. reminiscent of early primates running from their first glimpse
of a cooking fire, innovation is often met with fear and contempt. it
takes time for the parasite of our own psychology to extract itself
from the comfort of tradition and seems to inflict unnecessary pain
while doing so. but rather than a gradual transition into acceptance,
we tend to erect a cognitive partition that grants us amnesia for our
having ever resisted those ideas. instead, the once-derided novelty
suddenly becomes all too obvious for us. like flipping a switch, the
initial sentiments of that idea is stupid! are quickly replaced with
the clarity of everyone knows that! in doing so, we skip out on the
best part, which is the excitement generated by an idea that is both
new and useful.
this fear to clear switch is a psychological phenomenon that
affects all of us, and it is aligned with this books recurring theme of
opportunity. by becoming aware of our primitive resistance to change
were better equipped to overcome it. this allows us to hit the sweet
spot and become motivated to apply novel strategies in our ongoing
hunt for personal development. so, rather than running from the fi re,
we become illuminated by it. if nothing else, this light will help you
to show off your new set of massive, muscular arms.
until next time, raise the barr!
gglloossssaarryy
accommodating resistancechange in the force of resistance throughout the rom of
exercise, as a result of your action against it.
adaptationgoing beyond where you started. this is where you get bigger, faster, and
stronger. ultimately, this is what youre after.
adaptive recoverytype of technique that works with the bodys natural biochemistry to
facilitate recovery adaptation.
anaboliccharacterized by the process of building muscle.
anchoringthe process of standardizing intensity across individuals.
antagonistmusclesthose muscles that perform opposing actions, like the biceps and
triceps.
autoregulationthe use of personal feedback to adjust your training to your abilities on
that day.
biceps musclethe large arm muscle between the shoulder and forearm that we associate
with the biceps and triceps muscles.
blue shiftingdecreasing recovery time and time to peak adaptation (i.e., they are hap-
pening faster), indicated by a shortened wavelength on the recovery adaptation curve.
this is consistent with blunting (also known as decreasing) the adaptive response.
brachialisan elbow flexor muscle that lies beneath the biceps.
brachioradialisan elbow flexor muscle that is highly visible on the forearm.
bracingestablishing stabilizing tension throughout your core.
brand annihilationwhen a specific brand name is used to represent an entire product
category.
break-drop-brake techniquedisproportionately applied force toward the end of the
eccentric rom. this is done to increase the eccentric stress stimulus from otherwise
light loads. also known as break drops.
carrying anglethe angle created at your elbow by the difference in alignment between
your arm and forearm.
caseina slow-digesting, milk-derived protein. this protein clots in the stomach and is
slowly digested to provide a steady trickle of amino acids to the body.
cataboliccharacterized bythe process of muscle breakdown.
central nervous system (cns)see nervous system.
cluster trainingsets during which a brief rest (e.g., a few seconds) is taken after each rep.
concentric constraint(con-con)concept that illustrates the fact that we immediately
limit the load of every training set based on our weakness of the concentric portion of
the rep.
concentric contractionsthe shortening of a muscle by producing more force than that
which is opposing it.
con-rom (concentric range of motion)the portion of the full concentric rom that
requires the greatest force output (also known as the sticking point). this is the weakest
part of the rep, which subsequently establishes the 1rm load.
consecutive contraction limita further reduced training load (from the con-rom) nec-
essary to perform consecutive full rom contractions, which we know as a set. typically
expressed as a percent of 1rm, and often used for iron age prescriptive programming.
